Sidney Blumenthal, an aide to President Clinton, chatted amiably with the supermodel Heidi Klum at the George magazine cocktail party before a White House correspondents' dinner on Saturday night. Kevin Spacey walked through the crowd at the Washington Hilton as a flock of camera crews trailed him.Christie Brinkley stood in front of a camera set that was specifically constructed for the occasion by George for those guests with publicity needs beyond those of ordinary civilians. With television lights blazing, Ms. Brinkley spoke to a reporter from Access Hollywood about the state of politics in America.Sidney Blumenthal, an aide to President Clinton, chatted amiably with the supermodel Heidi Klum at the George magazine cocktail party before a White House correspondents' dinner on Saturday night. Kevin Spacey walked through the crowd at the Washington Hilton as a flock of camera crews trailed him.Christie Brinkley stood in front of a camera set that was specifically constructed for the occasion by George for those guests with publicity needs beyond those of ordinary civilians. With television lights blazing, Ms. Brinkley spoke to a reporter from Access Hollywood about the state of politics in America.Frank Lalli, George's editor in chief, stood off to the side and observed the panoply of celebrity before him, a rapt smile on his face. He had invited more celebrities to sit at his three tables than had any other magazine at the dinner had. And even if actress Hilary Swank and the director James Cameron were unable to make it, and Regis Philbin sat with a Time Inc. table, George still managed to attract the model Gisele Bundchen, the actor Tobey Maguire, Patricia Hearst, the director John Waters, the actress Bai Ling, Ms. Klum and Mr. Spacey, who starred with the President of the United States in a short film spoof about life after the White House.Mr. Lalli knows that George, the political magazine founded by John F. Kennedy Jr. in 1997, can use all the flash and strobe lights it can get. Even before its publicly adored, politically connected and publicity-generating editor died in a plane crash last July, the magazine was suffering from sluggish ad sales and stagnant circulation. Fearing that his corporate partner, Hachette Filipacchi Magazines, a unit of the Lagardere Group, was about to pull out of George, Mr. Kennedy had in the last week of his life gone in search of alternate financing.The terrible irony of George magazine is that it took the sudden death of its editor, upon whom the magazine's success was first hinged, to enhance its odds of survival. The publicity surrounding the plane crash in which Mr. Kennedy died re-ignited the public's interest in the magazine, significantly bumping up newsstand sales and recapturing the fancy of Jack W. Kliger, the Hachette chief executive who had stepped into the job only two weeks before Mr. Kennedy's death and had been considering pulling his company's support.But with its mix of politics and entertainment, George has always been an odd creature, as odd as the cover subject of the first issue: the model Cindy Crawford dressed like George Washington. Because that odd-duck editorial mix never quite took off, many in the magazine industry and the advertising business began to feel vindicated when the magazine was on the respirator.Now Mr. Lalli, George's editor in chief since December, must make the magazine a success. And while Mr. Kennedy was fond of the phrase ''politics and entertainment,'' Mr. Lalli's stump speech focuses on ''politics, power, pop culture and people,'' which is to him a magical -- and conveniently sibilant -- formula for success.But there is still a long way to go. Advertising pages were down 74.4 percent in January through March from the similar period last year, according to the Publishers Information Bureau. That was a 70.3 percent drop in estimated advertising revenue, from a reported $3.4 million, to $1 million.In 1999, the financial outlook was not that strong to begin with. The magazine lost more than $8 million, said two former staff members, , while Hachette also paid $10 million to the Kennedy family to buy out Mr. Kennedy's 50 percent share of the magazine last fall. Mr. Kliger has also contributed a substantial sum for added marketing efforts -- much to the dismay of the publishing staff at Mirabella magazine, another Hachette publication, who said last week that they believed his investment in George contributed to their magazine's downfall. Mr. Kliger announced last week that he would close Mirabella.After Mr. Kennedy's death, circulation at George had jumped so much that Mr. Kliger said that he would change the rate base -- the circulation guaranteed to advertisers -- to 500,000 from 450,000 in September. Newsstand sales jumped by 148.3 percent on average for the last six issues of 1999 -- five of which came after Mr. Kennedy's death. There were thousands of new subscribers. Total sales were up by 38.3 percent in the same period.The October issue, packaged as a special tribute to Mr. Kennedy, was so popular that the online auction site eBay is currently accepting bids of $50 a copy for it.The enthusiasm at the newsstand charmed Mr. Kliger. But whether any of Mr. Lalli's issues will wind up as objects of fevered battles on eBay is another question. Mr. Lalli has the unenviable task of not only stepping into a job that several editors had declined but of filling the shoes of Mr. Kennedy. Mr. Lalli, 57, will not be tailed by paparazzi if he roller blades through Central Park. His most notable previous position was as managing editor of Money magazine, which is published by Time Inc. He held that post until July 1998, when he became a senior executive editor at Time Inc. He parted company with Time last year and announced that he would start a magazine consulting firm. A few months later, Mr. Kliger plucked him for the job.''My intention is not to reinvent George magazine,'' Mr. Lalli said in an interview last week. ''It is to fulfill John's vision. I would not have taken this job if I did not believe that the magazine could be a positive political force and inform readers and engage them. And of course, sell copies.''The May issue is the first that fully bears his stamp. Mr. Lalli prepared two covers: the cover article on the newsstand edition, ''The Untold Elian Story'' details the history of the Cuban boy's family and traces the lives of the Cubans who accompanied him and died on the ocean journey. The article, by Ann Louise Bardach, was featured on a segment of ''60 Minutes'' on April 23, the night before the issue arrived on newsstands, a public-relations feather in Mr. Lalli's cap. In another article, an excerpt from Betty Friedan's new autobiography, Ms. Friedan revealed that her husband had physically abused her.''With those stories, we have answered the most important question,'' Mr. Lalli said. ''Which is, can a monthly magazine about politics break news? The answer is yes.''As magazines sometimes do, George set a different cover on the issue sent to subscribers. The cover article -- ''Will the Biggest Liar Win?'' -- argues that Al Gore and George W. Bush have distorted the truth and is not likely to land the magazine on ''60 Minutes.''Mr. Lalli has widened the editorial mix to attract more mass-market readers. He has hired a fashion editor, for example, from Detour magazine. He has also added a columnist from New York magazine, Michael Gross, who has also written books about the modeling industry and most recently the baby-boomer generation.But there are some decidedly silly moments in Mr. Lalli's first issue. In a four-page spread ''George Goes to the Oscars,'' the editors brought what they described as ''a slightly frayed cardboard likeness'' of Hillary Rodham Clinton and asked celebrities to pose with it.In another article, ''Spin with Me, Rudy,'' the actress Heather Locklear poses in a form-fitting gown; the text accompanying the picture is advice -- from the character she plays on the television show ''Spin City'' -- to Rudolph W. Giuliani on how he can beat Mrs. Clinton in the Senate campaign.And the last page features the Doonesbury cartoon character Duke offering his opinion on what he would do if he were President.And if those last two examples are reminiscent of the TV commercials in which soap opera actors advertising aspirin proudly intone ''I'm not a doctor, but I play one on TV,'' Mr. Lalli defended those articles as an essential part of the magazine's entertainment mix.''I think those pieces fit with our not-politics-as-usual mix,'' he said. ''The readers want to be informed,  and they want insight, but they also want to be entertained.''There are also some questionable moments on the advertising side.  The May issue features an ad for the George Magazine Sweepstakes, in which readers are asked to answer questions about the advertisements. One question asks readers, ''Ralph Lauren has a new fragrance. What is it? (see pages 2-3).''And there is the kind of advertisement that scares off media planners looking for affluent readers -- An ad for a ''New Revolutionary European Baldness Treatment.''While it is too early to forecast the reaction of the mainstream advertising community, many advertisers so far have remained largely unreceptive.Alan Jurmain, the director of integrated media services at Lowe Lintas & Partners , said that he was skeptical. ''Any advertiser likes to be in a magazine that is vital and topical and, perish the thought, hot, but George is not any of those things at this stage of the game,'' he said. ''It is a work in progress.''Others are keenly enthusiastic. David Verklin, the chief executive of Carat North America, a media services company that is a division of Aegis, and who advises clients like Pfizer, CBS, Midas and America Online, said that he was pleasantly surprised by the May issue. He said that the magazine under Mr. Lalli feels less like an insider publication.''It's got more of a sense of humor, and is attempting to describe the political experience in a broader and more mainstream way,'' he said. ''Because of that, I am frankly much more open-minded about George's future now than I have been any time in the last 12 months.''
Barbie is running for president, and I'm supposed to feel great about it. Mattel has teamed up with two women's groups to create a Barbie for President 2000, complete with a Girls' Bill of Rights, a blue suit, pearls and high heels. This doll, the press release says, is supposed to ''broaden girls' vision of what's possible.''Well, I spent 24 years in Congress fighting to improve the status of women, to have us viewed as full citizens. Now I feel as though I've lost the fight. What is the ''Barbie for President'' message? I'm afraid that it's ''You can be president if you're a 10!''Barbie is running for president, and I'm supposed to feel great about it. Mattel has teamed up with two women's groups to create a Barbie for President 2000, complete with a Girls' Bill of Rights, a blue suit, pearls and high heels. This doll, the press release says, is supposed to ''broaden girls' vision of what's possible.''Well, I spent 24 years in Congress fighting to improve the status of women, to have us viewed as full citizens. Now I feel as though I've lost the fight. What is the ''Barbie for President'' message? I'm afraid that it's ''You can be president if you're a 10!''Gloria Steinem says that an easy way to detect sexism is to reverse the roles. Let's do the switch. In our scenario, no man in history has ever occupied the Oval Office, and a popular toy among young boys is the Leonardo DiCaprio doll, which comes with a lot of great outfits. Along comes the newest Leo doll: same body, but this time, he's president! This gives a huge boost to boys' morale everywhere. They can dream that one day they, too, can win the White House, but only if they look like Leo!Let's get back to the real world. Portraits of past presidents tell us that being a hunk is definitely not a job requirement. So why should we feel great about a message that says a woman can go to the White House if she looks like Barbie?During my years in public office, one issue I got the most mail about was my hair, with questions like, ''How do you wear your hair when you're dressed up?'' I was urged to dye my hair, and people even enclosed checks to pay for a makeover. In no audience I've ever spoken to have I found a man who sent Al Gore a check for Rogaine or asked Newt Gingrich to get a haircut. I would have hoped that we could have erased such differences by the dawn of the 21st century. But now, it seems, the only way to imagine a woman in the White House is to put Barbie there. I'm sorry, but I just can't get enthusiastic. I can see my hero, Eleanor Roosevelt, sitting in heaven, shaking her head and saying, ''They still don't get it!''Patricia Schroeder, a former Democratic representative from Colorado, is the president of the Association of American Publishers.
Dr. William R. (Reyn) Archer III is the health commissioner for the state of Texas. He got into trouble a few weeks ago when, in an interview with The Times, he made some untoward remarks about Hispanics and teen pregnancy.The remarks proved embarrassing to Gov. George W. Bush, who has been running from one photo-op to another, posing relentlessly with black and brown children and teenagers, trying to show that he and his party are not the mortal enemies of ethnic minorities.Dr. William R. (Reyn) Archer III is the health commissioner for the state of Texas. He got into trouble a few weeks ago when, in an interview with The Times, he made some untoward remarks about Hispanics and teen pregnancy.The remarks proved embarrassing to Gov. George W. Bush, who has been running from one photo-op to another, posing relentlessly with black and brown children and teenagers, trying to show that he and his party are not the mortal enemies of ethnic minorities.(The governor's task is not an easy one when you consider that Ronald Reagan chose to kick off his 1980 general election campaign in Philadelphia, Miss., which is where the civil rights workers Andrew Goodman, Michael Schwerner and James Chaney were murdered, and that the governor's own father, George Herbert Walker Bush, pumped up his win over Michael Dukakis in the 1988 presidential race with the loathsome Willie Horton ads.)So George W. does what he can to put a friendlier face on the G.O.P., and then he picks up The Times and sees that his man, Reyn Archer, is blaming the sky-high teen pregnancy rate in Texas on the fact that Hispanics lack the cultural belief ''that getting pregnant is a bad thing.''Uh-oh.Said Dr. Archer: ''If I were to go to a Hispanic community and say, 'Well, we need to get you into family planning,' they say, 'No, I want to be pregnant' -- it doesn't work very well.''Latinos in Texas were not happy about that and neither was George W. So before you could say ''Let me take my Texas-sized foot out of my mouth,'' Reyn Archer was apologizing.Which might have been fine except for the fact that Dr. Archer, a gynecologist, has said so much crazy stuff in the past. In the early 1990's, Dr. Archer was a deputy assistant secretary at the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, where he served as the Bush administration's point person on the so-called gag rule, the regulation that barred doctors at federally financed family planning clinics from discussing abortion with women.Dr. Archer told a Congressional hearing that a woman could not even be told that a nearby hospital offered abortions.He was asked if that information could be provided if the woman's life was at stake.Dr. Archer replied, ''No, sir.''On another occasion, Dr. Archer was asked about the type of family-planning counseling he gave to the women he saw in his private practice. He said, ''I would talk to them, and if they did not bend to my will, I would tell them to go elsewhere.''Dr. Archer is not only a staunch foe of abortion, he has objected in the past to birth control measures as well, most notably the pill. He is reported to have said, at a Health and Human Services dinner in 1991, that ''when it became possible for women to buy contraceptives on their own, men lost their manhood.''Dr. Archer's appointment as Texas health commissioner was loudly applauded by right-wing groups in Texas. He has said he likes to look at health and other problems with an anthropologist's eye, examining the customs, behavioral issues and cultural values that might be contributing factors.The Houston Chronicle recently reported that at an education conference in 1998, Dr. Archer said, ''We need to figure out why it is when blacks were more segregated, and had less opportunity, that they did better on cultural measures than they do in that sense today.''The newspaper said Dr. Archer expressed the view that blacks ''don't buy'' such cultural and legal institutions as marriage, and that a value system that places loyalty above honesty might explain why a mostly black jury acquitted O. J. Simpson.I could be wrong, but this may not be the best way for the Republican Party to reach out for black votes.Dr. Archer has said that he's made some mistakes, that some of his comments were awkward, and he's sorry if he has offended anyone.A spokesman told me on Friday it was never Dr. Archer's intent to criticize or disparage anyone, and that he felt ''really bad'' about the way his remarks were perceived.The doctor's regret was intensified, he said, ''by the closeness that he felt to Hispanics and to African-Americans.''
Following are excerpts from remarks prepared for delivery yesterday by Vice President Al Gore to the International Press Institute in Boston, as provided by the Gore campaign:Twenty-five years ago today, the last helicopters lifted off from the roof of our embassy in Saigon. Although that brought an end to the war in Vietnam -- a conflict I witnessed with my own eyes -- it did not bring an end to its influence on our thinking about foreign policy.Following are excerpts from remarks prepared for delivery yesterday by Vice President Al Gore to the International Press Institute in Boston, as provided by the Gore campaign:Twenty-five years ago today, the last helicopters lifted off from the roof of our embassy in Saigon. Although that brought an end to the war in Vietnam -- a conflict I witnessed with my own eyes -- it did not bring an end to its influence on our thinking about foreign policy.Even now, a decade after the end of the cold war, we hear echoes of the old arguments. Some seem to believe that with the fall of the old Soviet empire, we have nothing more to fear in the world and should dramatically cut our defense budget. Others keep insisting that we continue to prepare to face down a cold war threat that no longer exists and persistently ignore the world as it is. I believe that both groups are locked in a self-destructive argument over a false choice. . . .We are now in a new era. . . . We are now in a global age. . . .We need a new security agenda for the global age based on forward engagement. . . .In the global age, we must be prepared to engage in regional conflicts selectively -- where the stability of a region important to our national security is at stake, where we can assure ourselves that nothing short of military engagement can secure our national interest, where we are certain that the use of military force can succeed in doing so, where we have allies willing to help share the burden and where the cost is proportionate. America cannot be the world's policeman. But we must reject the new isolationism that says: Don't help anywhere, because we cannot help everywhere. . . .But perhaps the biggest change in our approach to the classic agenda is how we engage two countries that once were only known to us as enemies: Russia and China.During the cold war, we worked to contain these two powers and limit their reach. Our task in the 21st century is not making them weak, but instead to encourage forces of reform.That is why we have worked hard these past seven years to help Russia make a transition to a market-based democracy. We have helped Russia privatize its economy and build a civil society marked by free elections and an active press. We have brought Russia into a working relationship with NATO through the Permanent Joint Council and the Partnership for Peace program. We have been able to work with Russian forces successfully inside a NATO framework in the Balkans.We have helped safeguard Russian nuclear material against the danger of theft. We have made it possible for thousands of Russia's nuclear scientists and weapons experts to find peaceful pursuits. And we have helped Russia to reduce its nuclear arsenal by nearly 5,000 warheads.This work has not been without difficulty, or controversy. We strongly disagree with Russia's course in Chechnya. Russia must intensify its own work to stop the flow of dangerous technologies that irresponsible groups and rogue states can use to create weapons of mass destruction.Russia must still take decisive steps to combat corruption and achieve reform. But a new cold war is not the right path to progress. Engaging Russia is the right thing to do. . . .For these same reasons, we must also follow a policy toward China that is focused on results, not rhetoric.Make no mistake: we have strong disagreements with China over human rights and religious freedom, and over Chinese treatment of Tibet. These issues cannot -- and must not -- be ignored or marginalized. They must constantly be pursued. Human rights and human dignity speak to the deepest bonds we share, across all borders and nationalities. America has to prod China to make progress in all these areas, and as president, that's exactly what I'll do.We also have concerns over tensions building between China and Taiwan. We need to maintain our commitment to the ''one China''  policy, but urge China and Taiwan to intensify their dialogue and to resolve their problems by peaceful means. The administration is honoring its obligation to make defensive weapons available to Taiwan. But I am deeply concerned that those in the Congress who are pushing the Taiwan Security Enhancement Act are blind to its consequences: a sharp deterioration in the security of the region.It is wrong to isolate and demonize China, to build a wall when we need to build a bridge. . . .I strongly support permanent normal trade relations with China, and I will continue to press the Congress to support it this year. I support China's membership in the World Trade Organization, to make China abide by the same rules of international trade that we follow today. . . .From what we can tell of his foreign policy, Governor Bush does not prepare us to meet the grand challenges of both the classic and new security agendas. . . .Governor Bush dangerously fixates on the cold war past when speaking of the use of force. He suggests that he would not intervene to relieve even the brutal repression of ethnic cleansing and genocide. No wonder it took him six weeks to say anything about our action against the ethnic cleansing in Kosovo. Is that the right message for America to send to people around the globe struggling for freedom?Stuck in a cold war mindset, Governor Bush continues to view Russia and China primarily as present or future enemies. While we must remain vigilant against any deterioration in our relationships, the reality of the global age is that Russia and China are indeed competitors, but also vital partners in our efforts to tackle problems menacing to us all.Just this past week, Governor Bush used his brief meeting with Russian Foreign Minister Ivanov to issue a warning that his intention would be to build and deploy a global Star Wars system that he believes could defend the U.S. and all our allies against any missile launch from any source. In the 1990's, most serious analysts took a look at the implausibility of this endeavor, the fantastical price that our taxpayers would be expected to pay, and the dangerously destabilizing consequences of traveling down that path and rejected this notion. Governor Bush wishes to return to it, and chose the worst possible venue in which to launch -- for lack of a better phrase -- his risky foreign policy scheme. . . .When it comes to the challenges of the new security agenda, Governor Bush's foreign policy is noticeably blank. Although Africa represents a vast untapped market, has major health and environmental concerns that directly impact us, and the reaches of modern terrorism took American lives in two of our embassies on that continent, Governor Bush said that Africa ''doesn't fit into the national strategic interests.'' Is that a responsible assessment of our national interest?One has to assume that these gaps in Governor Bush's foreign policy views and experience will be filled by the ideologies and inveterate antipathies of his party -- the right-wing, partisan isolationism of the Republican Congressional leadership. Since 1994, the Republicans in Congress have recklessly tossed aside decades of bipartisan cooperation on foreign policy.They have refused to adequately fund our diplomatic and international development efforts, from promoting peace in the Middle East to fighting drugs in South America. They have held our contributions to the United Nations hostage to their own political agenda for years. They have repeatedly tried to sabotage this administration's programs, even in places like Bosnia and Kosovo where what is needed is steadiness and continuity of purpose. They have made themselves the sworn enemies of a worldwide effort to deal with the global environment.And in the end, despite their constant assertion of concern for our alliances, they have rejected the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty. In one blatant partisan move, they have profoundly shaken the confidence of our allies in American steadiness, purpose and in our capacity to lead.Governor Bush joined with the isolationist, partisan Republican majority in Congress in opposing the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty. He chose politics over principle. . . .I believe America can do better -- for our own national security, and for the ideals we must model to the world.
Politicians of the left and right are finally beginning to pay attention to the groundswell of resentment about invasions of privacy.In the Senate, transportation subcommittee chairman Richard Shelby leads the way: the law he sponsored to prevent states from selling to private investigators information and pictures required from motorists seeking a driver's license was upheld by the Supreme Court. He also led repeal of the ill-advised federal standard for licenses that would have used Social Security numbers to create an Orwellian national identification card.Politicians of the left and right are finally beginning to pay attention to the groundswell of resentment about invasions of privacy.In the Senate, transportation subcommittee chairman Richard Shelby leads the way: the law he sponsored to prevent states from selling to private investigators information and pictures required from motorists seeking a driver's license was upheld by the Supreme Court. He also led repeal of the ill-advised federal standard for licenses that would have used Social Security numbers to create an Orwellian national identification card.In the House, Texas Representative Ron Paul's bill to prohibit the use of the Social Security number as an all-purpose identifier is no longer in limbo. Ways and Means subcommittee chairman Clay Shaw reports that this action to combat widespread identity theft will be taken up this month.Chairman Dan Burton's Government Reform Committee will move on that privacy bill in June, as well as the bill to create a Privacy Protection Commission pressed by the G.O.P.'s Asa Hutchinson and Democrat Jim Moran.Here's evidence that we're getting traction: President Clinton and Vice President Al Gore have detected the growing political appeal of personal privacy in a time of data rape. To a commencement audience yesterday, Clinton unveiled his plan to repel the invaders, challenging the Republican Congress to get on with legislation to stem the tide of snooping.Up to now, the Clinton-Gore record has been troubling to civil libertarians; under the rubric of searching for ''deadbeat dads,'' this administration now forces private employers to inform on workers to federal bureaucrats as never before. But Clinton's belated concern about penetrations of our privacy by marketers and e-snoops, often in support of legislation already in work, is welcome.In assessing his proposals, keep in mind the key words consumer consent.Should banks and credit card  companies be able to sell our financial secrets to outside pitchmen? Clinton favors forbidding this practice, so ardently hailed as efficient by believers in ''targeted marketing,'' unless  the individual specifically gives  an informed consent. That's good; Treasury Secretary Larry Summers tells me, ''It's got to be wrong for  my stockbroker to see my life insurance physical and where I shop.''When banks merge with insurance companies or H.M.O.'s, should we allow medical records to be passed around within the conglomerate? Clinton says no, unless the patient or consumer affirmatively consents. That's also good; none of this ''opt out'' trickery, by which marketers piously claim to be sensitive to privacy but put the burden of protecting personal information on the patient.What about sharing financial data having nothing to do with medical records? Here the Clinton-Gore plan caves in to the secret salesmen. ''We will preserve financial firms' ability to share the information that they need,'' goes the administration proposal, ''to develop new products and manage their risks . . .'' No bank is required to obtain depositor's consent; it's up to the individual to ''opt out'' -- to take the difficult initiative of demanding that the bank not make his life an open book.In defense of this weakness, Summers explains ''We're trying to strike a balance between the efficient use of information and the need to protect privacy. Opinions have certainly changed over the past couple of years. In terms of what you want,'' Summers tells the privacy nut who has long been badgering him, ''last year we were on our 15-yard line. Now we're within field-goal range.''A man to carry the ball as Clintonians head for the showers is ''Senator Privacy,'' Shelby of Alabama. His bill in the Banking Committee against ''behavioral profiling'' stops bankers and credit card issuers from disclosing transactions unless ''the consumer has affirmatively consented in writing to the transfer of such information.''Harangues on this issue will continue in this space, while apostles of efficiency, in bureaucracies public and private, try to pooh-pooh concerns of newly energized asserters of privacy.Consent! is our byword. And our first line of defense is the private, personal Social Security number; we won't let anybody coerce us into giving it out.
Hardly anyone outside Washington may have given a thought lately to Bradley Smith, a Republican nominee to the Federal Election Commission. But the battle over the Smith nomination is becoming an embarrassment to Trent Lott, the Senate majority leader and champion of Mr. Smith's cause. To Mr. Lott's consternation, more and more senators realize the foolishness of placing an ideological opponent of campaign finance reform laws in charge of their enforcement. Yet Mr. Lott persists, strong-arming Republican senators and telling Democrats he will hold up all presidential appointments until they let Mr. Smith through.Mr. Lott's pro-Smith crusade is just the latest manifestation of his all-out opposition to cleaning up election campaigns. Having engineered a Republican filibuster against the broad ban on soft money sponsored by Senators John McCain and Russell Feingold -- a bill favored by a Senate majority -- he is preparing to ram through a phony version of reform sponsored by Senator Chuck Hagel, hoping it will provide cover for Republican senators under pressure from their constituents to vote for reform and under pressure from Mr. Lott to kill it off.Hardly anyone outside Washington may have given a thought lately to Bradley Smith, a Republican nominee to the Federal Election Commission. But the battle over the Smith nomination is becoming an embarrassment to Trent Lott, the Senate majority leader and champion of Mr. Smith's cause. To Mr. Lott's consternation, more and more senators realize the foolishness of placing an ideological opponent of campaign finance reform laws in charge of their enforcement. Yet Mr. Lott persists, strong-arming Republican senators and telling Democrats he will hold up all presidential appointments until they let Mr. Smith through.Mr. Lott's pro-Smith crusade is just the latest manifestation of his all-out opposition to cleaning up election campaigns. Having engineered a Republican filibuster against the broad ban on soft money sponsored by Senators John McCain and Russell Feingold -- a bill favored by a Senate majority -- he is preparing to ram through a phony version of reform sponsored by Senator Chuck Hagel, hoping it will provide cover for Republican senators under pressure from their constituents to vote for reform and under pressure from Mr. Lott to kill it off.Mr. Lott is reportedly offering a half-dozen federal judges for approval by the Senate in return for Democratic cooperation on Mr. Smith. Mr. Lott regards the offer as magnanimous. It is in fact insulting. For several years, he and other Republicans have thrown up one road block after another to President Clinton's judicial appointments -- a partisan debasing of the honored principle under which the Senate advises and consents on presidential nominations. This year he has allowed confirmation of only seven judges. When the tables were turned in 1992, also a hotly contested election year, a Democratic-controlled Senate was serious enough about its responsibilities to approve 66 judges nominated by President George Bush, a Republican.Mr. Lott may even throw in some more judges if that will help win the day for Mr. Smith. But federal appointments should not be subject to backroom deals. The Democrats should resist Mr. Lott's blandishments and, along with like-minded Republicans, should reject Mr. Smith.Meanwhile, the case for broad, meaningful campaign finance reform grows ever stronger. With each passing month, Republicans and Democrats set new records on soft money, the unregulated donations to parties that the McCain-Feingold bill would ban. A recent black-tie Republican event prompted Democrats to boast that the dress for their fund-raiser was blue jeans. Either way, the sums raised were obscene. The parties are on their way to doubling the $260 million in soft money raised in 1996. It is time for Mr. Lott to let the full Senate vote on McCain-Feingold. At the very least this will give the public a chance in an election year to judge who wants to change the existing corrupt system and who does not.
Waving banners of gay pride and identity, a crowd estimated in the hundreds of thousands rallied in the nation's capital today, celebrating the gains of the gay rights movement in recent years and vowing redoubled efforts on issues like hate crime legislation.One leader after another urged the crowd to demonstrate its influence at the ballot box in November. For more than six hours, under a warm spring sun, a wide range of speakers, including the parents of Matthew Shepard, the Wyoming gay college student whose beating death galvanized the drive for laws against hate crimes, addressed the unfinished agenda of the gay rights movement.Waving banners of gay pride and identity, a crowd estimated in the hundreds of thousands rallied in the nation's capital today, celebrating the gains of the gay rights movement in recent years and vowing redoubled efforts on issues like hate crime legislation.One leader after another urged the crowd to demonstrate its influence at the ballot box in November. For more than six hours, under a warm spring sun, a wide range of speakers, including the parents of Matthew Shepard, the Wyoming gay college student whose beating death galvanized the drive for laws against hate crimes, addressed the unfinished agenda of the gay rights movement.''Let people know you are a part of America, you are a solid God-fearing part of America, and you deserve the same rights,'' said Dennis Shepard, Matthew's father.There was a strong political subtext to the day. Elizabeth Birch, executive director of the Human Rights Campaign, the nation's largest gay and lesbian organization, told the audience, ''We must elect Al Gore as president of the United States,'' arguing that ''the very future of the U.S. Supreme Court for the next generation hangs in the balance.''Ms. Birch said of Gov. George W. Bush's position on gay rights issues: ''There is absolutely nothing about these policies that is compassionate.''Vice President Gore, addressing the group by videotape beamed on a huge screen above the Mall, declared, ''I stand with you, and am with you every step of the way'' in the march for civil rights.Mr. Gore said he would not rest in the fight against AIDS and in the struggle to protect gay Americans from employment discrimination and to ensure that ''crimes of hate against all people, including gays and lesbians,'' are severely punished.President Clinton, also speaking by videotape, said he had created the ''most inclusive'' administration in history, with more than 150 openly gay men and lesbians as appointees, and would ''continue our fight for an employment nondiscrimination act that would ban discrimination against gays and lesbians in the workplace.''But there was more than electoral politics to the day; there was a broader, more festive tone. The marchers, who began to wind from the Washington Monument to the  Capitol at 10:20 a.m., were a long, ebullient parade of cops and veterans, drag queens and college students, gay parents with toddlers on their backs and heterosexual parents marching in support of gay children.Their signs and banners, some carefully designed and mass produced, some homemade, reflected the diversity: ''Proud Son of a Lesbian.'' ''Protect Our Families.'' ''Stop Hate Crimes.'' ''Ohio Gay Officers Action League.'' ''Gay Veterans of Chicago.'' ''Proud to be from Vermont.''There were several variations on Vermont signs. The state, which recently passed a bill creating civil unions that give gay couples the rights of marriage, was praised and trumpeted throughout the day.As the organizers hoped, there were many families here. Larry Leon was pushing his 22-month-old twins in a double-stroller with his partner, Marc Salans, and carrying a sign that demanded, ''Keep Gay Adoption Legal.'' Mr. Leon, who lives in Washington, said, ''We want to celebrate our family, celebrate the joy of having a family, celebrate the success of our adoption endeavor.''Susan from North Carolina, who declined to give her last name, said she, her partner and their 17-month-old daughter were ''just marching for our family.''Ms. Birch, of the Human Rights Campaign, described her and her partner's adoption of twins and told the crowd, ''Don't let anybody tell you that you're not worthy of parenthood.''There were tiny clusters of protesters. As the march began, a man with a bullhorn shouted, ''Sick! Sick! Sick!'' The marchers chanted back, ''Shame! Shame! Shame!'' Another protester yelled: ''You're despicable before God. You know nothing about families.'' And a marcher shouted back, ''Jesus loves me.''But by and large, the march had the air of a vast street festival, fed by the array of entertainers and celebrities, from Melissa Etheridge to Martina Navratilova, who took the stage at the foot of the Capitol. Anne Heche, the actress, declared from the stage, ''I gotta say I was straight for 27 years and I never came to a party as big as this.''The march came under criticism from some gay activists, who argued that the planning was not inclusive enough, that the organizers had allowed too much commercialization with sponsors like United Airlines and Showtime Network and that the purpose of the march was ill-defined.One critic, Bill Dobbs, with the Ad Hoc Committee for an Open Process, said today: ''Rather than unite and galvanize the gay, lesbian, bisexual and transgender community, the march's organizers and the Human Rights Campaign have created divisions. That rift, about who speaks for the movement and how decisions are made, must be addressed before we can move forward.''But Dianne Hardy-Garcia, executive director of the Millennium March on Washington, as today's rally was called, said that taking such a strong, visible stand for equality in an election year ''is smart -- and a judicious use of resources.''Ms. Hardy-Garcia said the march was intended to show the generational and geographic range of the movement, its growing numbers of openly gay families and its ability to build coalitions. ''I think there was an image that we were only an urban gay community,'' she said.One of those coalitions was demonstrated on the stage today, when the family of Matthew Shepard was joined by the family of James Byrd Jr., a black man who was dragged to death behind a truck by three whites in Jasper, Tex.Many of those here today said they hoped their presence would send a signal. When asked why she was here, a New York City police sergeant replied: ''Strength in numbers. Pride. For some people, it's a life-altering event.''This was the first national gay rights march in Washington since 1993. Organizers gave various estimates of the crowd size as the day progressed, asserting that at its peak, it was 800,000; the United States Park Police no longer issues crowd estimates, which had become an unending source of debate with the organizers of various marches.
Gov. George W. Bush plans to push soon for a fundamental overhaul of Social Security, reopening an issue that could be among the most combustible and bitterly debated of the presidential campaign.In the next month, his aides said, Mr. Bush intends to begin pressing his case for the establishment of individual investment accounts within Social Security, a change that would be the most far-reaching to the program since it was established during the Depression.Gov. George W. Bush plans to push soon for a fundamental overhaul of Social Security, reopening an issue that could be among the most combustible and bitterly debated of the presidential campaign.In the next month, his aides said, Mr. Bush intends to begin pressing his case for the establishment of individual investment accounts within Social Security, a change that would be the most far-reaching to the program since it was established during the Depression.Mr. Bush believes that the accounts, which would allow workers to invest a portion of their Social Security payroll taxes in the stock and bond markets, are an essential component of any plan to ensure the retirement system's long-term viability, his advisers said.Private accounts would allow workers to capture some of the historically high returns offered by Wall Street over the long run, thereby reducing the need to close a looming shortfall in Social Security's finances through benefit cuts or higher taxes, Mr. Bush's aides said.While they acknowledged that some voters would find the idea unsettling, the advisers noted that nearly half of households owned stock directly or through retirement accounts, creating a new ''investor class'' that extends well into the middle class and is increasingly eager to have control over its own finances.''People have an understanding of how markets work, and are used to securing a higher return on their savings,'' said one adviser to Mr. Bush. ''The debate on Social Security will be joined in a way that we believe will be open to new ideas.''Yet to most Democrats, including Vice President Al Gore, creating individual investment accounts is tantamount to abandoning Social Security's role as the provider of a guaranteed benefit for the elderly.Mr. Gore's aides said they would portray Mr. Bush's approach as too risky for many individuals because it would leave their retirement security exposed to the ups and downs of the stock market. They expect that argument to have particular resonance if Wall Street remains as volatile as it has been in recent months.Mr. Gore's team also intends to make a case that establishing personal accounts would have a huge economic cost because it would require using the portion of the projected federal budget surplus that would otherwise go to reducing and eventually eliminating the $3.5 trillion in national debt held by the public.Mr. Gore has made eliminating the public debt the centerpiece of his economic agenda, saying that to do so would push interest rates down and give the entire economy a boost. The vice president backs a plan that would leave Social Security intact but would extend its solvency to 2050 by allocating interest savings from the reduction in the national debt to the retirement system.''One of the reasons Social Security has been so successful is that it's a social compact between generations, one generation taking care of the next generation,'' said Chris Lehane, Mr. Gore's spokesman. ''To play around with privatizing it, when in fact there's no need to privatize it, will only lead to bad results.''Under current projections, Social Security will start paying out more in benefits than it is taking in through payroll taxes starting in 2015, as the baby boomers begin retiring in large numbers. By 2037, under current projections, it will have run through a ''trust fund'' of i.o.u.'s it has collected from the government, and from that point on will be able to pay only 75 percent of promised benefits.Mr. Bush plans to give a major speech on Social Security sometime in May, and to press the issue from then on, his aides said. He will not offer a detailed plan, but rather will commit himself to a set of principles that he would use as the basis for bipartisan negotiations if he was elected president.Those principles start with the establishment of private accounts. Mr. Bush will probably not specify what portion of a worker's payroll taxes could go into the accounts, but he is leaning toward making participation in the accounts voluntary, his advisers said. Under this approach, a portion of the retirement benefit would be guaranteed and a portion would fluctuate with the performance of the investment account.As the system stands now, payroll taxes on today's workers go to pay benefits for current retirees. Mr. Bush's plan would start shifting Social Security toward a system in which each worker saved something for his or her own retirement.''The key is going to be augmenting the current pay-as-you-go system with a prefunded system based on personal accounts,'' said Lawrence B. Lindsey, the Bush campaign's chief economic adviser.Mr. Bush will also pledge not to increase payroll taxes, and not to reduce benefits for anyone in or nearing retirement. He has left open whether the retirement age, which is already rising gradually to 67 from 65, might eventually need to be increased again.Most of the privatization proposals put on the table in the last few years envision about two percentage points of the 12.4 percent payroll tax paid by each worker being channeled into individual accounts. Privately, Mr. Bush's aides say they envision a plan of roughly the same scale.To divert that portion of the payroll tax into the accounts while also paying benefits to current retirees would require using all or most of the roughly $2 trillion in surplus Social Security revenues the government expects to collect over the next decade.Under Mr. Gore's plan, all of the Social Security surplus would go to reducing the national debt held by the public. Mr. Bush's approach would almost certainly have to forgo large-scale reduction in the public debt. But because Mr. Bush's plan would give workers their own retirement accounts, it would decrease the government's long-term obligation to pay benefits out of tax revenues, which is another form of debt reduction.The subject is devilishly complex even for economists. It has long been an unwritten law of politics that there is little to gain and much to lose from making an issue of Social Security, and the deadlock on it in Washington over the last few years suggests that there is still great hesitancy among the general public, as well as among politicians, in grappling with its problems.The major political test is likely to be in the big industrial states that both campaigns consider essential to their electoral prospects, including Pennsylvania, Ohio and Michigan.Those states, and other crucial battlegrounds like Florida, have high proportions of older voters, who in the past could have been counted on to react strongly against any major changes to Social Security. Democrats remain confident that Mr. Bush's proposal will help drive older voters to Mr. Gore, but Republican strategists said that assumption might prove outdated.''The question that this election cycle will test,'' said one adviser to Mr. Bush, ''is whether times have changed enough through the emergence of a new investor class, and through the recognition that Social Security is going broke, that new solutions can be found.''The adviser said that neither party could be sure of the answer. Still, the issue is likely to help Democrats mobilize their traditional constituencies. In particular, Democrats said any push by Mr. Bush to privatize Social Security would be met by stiff resistance from labor unions.''This is an enormous issue for us,'' said Gerald Shea, an economic policy strategist for the A.F.L.-C.I.O. ''Especially if the Republican candidate promotes it, I wouldn't be surprised if this is the major issue on the minds of working families when they decide who to vote for.''In a poll last May by Princeton Survey Research Associates, 58 percent of Americans favored a system that would include private accounts. The idea was opposed by 33 percent.But the results were almost precisely the opposite when the same survey asked workers to choose between a program that guaranteed a monthly benefit based on lifetime earnings, as under the current system, and a program that would allow individual investment in the market without a guarantee. Given that choice, 59 percent favored the guaranteed payment, while 33 percent backed private investment.''The American people seem to favor the idea of individual retirement accounts in theory,'' said Evans Witt, the president of Princeton Survey Research Associates. ''The question is, how do you do it, and what does it cost, and does it put my benefits at risk?''THE 2000 CAMPAIGN: THE ISSUES
The top foreign policy adviser for Gov. George W. Bush argued today that Vice President Al Gore had misrepresented Mr. Bush's views on how to deal with Russia and China and had taken ''a series of positions that are at complete odds with how he has acted for the past seven years.''In a telephone conversation with reporters, Mr. Bush's adviser, Condoleezza Rice, offered a response to a speech by Mr. Gore that, while reported in newspapers today, had not yet been delivered. Based on the advance text of the speech, Ms. Rice said Mr. Gore had glossed over the Clinton administration's cuts in military procurement and had ignored his involvement in a largely failed effort to convert Russia to capitalism.The top foreign policy adviser for Gov. George W. Bush argued today that Vice President Al Gore had misrepresented Mr. Bush's views on how to deal with Russia and China and had taken ''a series of positions that are at complete odds with how he has acted for the past seven years.''In a telephone conversation with reporters, Mr. Bush's adviser, Condoleezza Rice, offered a response to a speech by Mr. Gore that, while reported in newspapers today, had not yet been delivered. Based on the advance text of the speech, Ms. Rice said Mr. Gore had glossed over the Clinton administration's cuts in military procurement and had ignored his involvement in a largely failed effort to convert Russia to capitalism.She was particularly critical of  Mr. Gore's sometimes meandering commitment to free trade.''Where was he when it was time to stand up and be counted in Seattle?'' she asked, talking about the meeting of the World Trade Organization in December that was disrupted by violent protests, and where an administration effort to start a new round of global trade talks had collapsed. Mr. Gore stayed away from the meeting, partly to avoid angering union members who were demonstrating. President Clinton attended the session for a day and a half.''And when it has come to the vote on China,'' Ms. Rice said, referring to the scheduled vote in late May over whether Congress will approve permanent normal trading relations with Beijing, ''he's been missing in action.''Mr. Gore offered his strongest endorsement yet of the China trade pact in a speech in Boston today,  saying he would work to win votes for its approval, even if it meant angering his labor constituency. But Ms. Rice was not impressed. ''It's about time,'' she said. ''The vote's in three weeks.''The exchange was particularly notable because foreign policy has played only a bit role in the presidential campaign. Mr. Bush has delivered one major speech on the subject, devoted almost entirely to security issues. That left him vulnerable to Mr. Gore's assertion today that the Texas governor ''dangerously fixates on the cold war past'' but has not dealt with the major issues of economic globalization that form some of the toughest foreign policy challenges.Ms. Rice, who was a Russia specialist on the National Security Council in President George Bush's administration, said Governor Bush was planning a series of foreign policy speeches, starting with trade. But she said that the timing of those speeches had not been set.In her critique of Mr. Gore's speech, Ms. Rice said she was particularly mystified about why he raised the issue of Russia.''The vice president himself oversaw Gore-Chernomyrdin,'' she said, referring to meetings between Mr. Gore and Viktor S. Chernomyrdin, the Russian prime minister, on issues that included security and economic transformation. ''At the time it was very clear that Chernomyrdin and others who the vice president was calling 'reformers' were stealing the country blind, with the money going into Swiss bank accounts.''The essence of Mr. Gore's critique today was that Mr. Bush was aligned with right-wing Republicans and regarded both Russia and China as ''future enemies'' rather than partners and competitors. Ms. Rice argued that Mr. Gore had deliberately misstated Mr. Bush's views, incorrectly casting him as a cold warrior and an isolationist. ''The interests of the U.S. are served by engagement with Russia and China,'' she said, ''but you have to engage them in a realistic way, not a romantic one.''''I would not call either country a threat, but both are challenges,'' she said, using terminology close to Mr. Gore's. She said Mr. Gore had mischaracterized Mr. Bush's views on missile defenses, an area of dispute with Russia. She enlisted Senator Richard G. Lugar of Indiana, a mainstream Republican on the Foreign Relations Committee, to declare that Mr. Gore's speech was a compendium of foreign policy problems ''rather than a strategic vision.''She also said Mr. Gore had participated in decisions to ''cut military procurement by 13 percent'' since the beginning of the Clinton administration.THE 2000 CAMPAIGN: THE TEXAS GOVERNOR
INTERNATIONALA3-13Iran to Start Trial Of Jews Accused of Spying  Thirteen Jews will go on trial today in Iran in the feared Revolutionary Court. The Jews are accused of spying for Israel, in a case that has been caught up in the swirl of Iran's internal political battles and could undo its tentative overtures to the West. But for most Iranians the case is a sideshow in a larger drama that has intensified between reformers and hard-liners.A12Nuclear Arms Control Debate  American proposals to change a key arms control agreement have revived some of the more important, if arcane, debates over nuclear strategy that not long ago seemed consigned to the dustbin of the cold war. One is widely viewed as raising the risk of accidental nuclear war.A8INTERNATIONALA3-13Iran to Start Trial Of Jews Accused of Spying  Thirteen Jews will go on trial today in Iran in the feared Revolutionary Court. The Jews are accused of spying for Israel, in a case that has been caught up in the swirl of Iran's internal political battles and could undo its tentative overtures to the West. But for most Iranians the case is a sideshow in a larger drama that has intensified between reformers and hard-liners.A12Nuclear Arms Control Debate  American proposals to change a key arms control agreement have revived some of the more important, if arcane, debates over nuclear strategy that not long ago seemed consigned to the dustbin of the cold war. One is widely viewed as raising the risk of accidental nuclear war.A8Israel Move to Transfer Land  Tensions between Jewish settlers and the Israeli government intensified as Prime Minister Ehud Barak prepared to seek cabinet approval for the transfer of three Arab villages near Jerusalem to the Palestinian Authority. Tensions between Mr. Barak's government and the Palestinians also escalated over the settlement issue.A13Lawmaker Favors Iraq Embargo  Representative Tony P. Hall, an Ohio Democrat and the first American member of Congress to go to Iraq to assess the impact of economic sanctions on the population, has concluded that while some of the suffering he saw was ''heartbreaking,'' he could not support lifting the United Nations' embargo.A12Zimbabwe's Crisis Continues  The Zimbabwe police, in a rare move, arrested the leader of a group of squatters after they beat up workers on a white-owned farm, officials said, but squatters staged other attacks elsewhere.A6Dominican Republic Violence  Bodyguards of the opposition's presidential candidate in the Dominican Republic shot and killed a governing party official and another man on Saturday. The opposition said the guards had acted after an assassination attempt, but the governing party said the guards had fired first.A10Russia Frees Chechen Rebels  Russia released 31 former rebels from a camp in northern Chechnya as part of its efforts to win wider popular support in the republic, an official said.A8NATIONALA14-20Bush to Press Case For Social Security Change  Gov. George W. Bush intends to begin pressing his case for the establishment of individual investment accounts within Social Security, a change that would be the most far-reaching to the program since it was established in the Depression.A1Decisions in Kaiser Dispute  A decision by the general counsel of the National Labor Relations Board to bring unfair labor practice charges against Kaiser Aluminum and a move by the federal government that could deny Kaiser access to the heavily subsidized electricity that it has relied on for decades seem to give the 2,900 striking Kaiser workers a stronger hand.A14Gay-Rights Rally in Capital  A crowd estimated in the hundreds of thousands rallied in the nation's capital, celebrating the gains of the gay rights movement in recent years and vowing redoubled efforts on issues like hate crime legislation.A14Clinton the Butt of His Jokes  President Clinton poked fun at himself with a vengeance in his stand-up routine at the annual White House correspondents dinner.A16Gore Attacks Bush  Vice President Al Gore, in a major foreign policy speech in Boston, attacked Gov. George W. Bush in a classic incumbent strategy, one made especially classic by Governor Bush's father, then the vice president, against another sitting governor in 1988.A18Bush Camp Fires Back  The top foreign policy adviser of Gov. George W. Bush, in response to the Gore speech, said that Vice President Al Gore had misrepresented Mr. Bush's views on how to deal with Russia and China and had taken ''a series of positions that are at complete odds with how he has acted for the past seven years.''A18SCIENCE/HEALTHRules Lag on Biotechnology  Scientists are creating a menagerie of genetically modified animals, promising what biotech backers say will be advantages like cheaper and more nutritious food. But critics and some Clinton administration officials say that the creatures are threatening to slip through a net of federal regulations that has surprisingly large holes.A1NEW YORK/REGIONB1-8Promoter for M.T.A. Debt Also Stands to Benefit  The involvement of Bear Stearns & Company in the Metropolitan Transportation Authority's proposal to restructure its debt to finance its capital plans is perhaps the most striking example of the way in which Wall Street can shape public policy to its own benefit.A1Another Senate Candidate  A former congressman from Westchester, Joseph J. DioGuardi, announced that he would seek the support of the Conservative, Right-to-Life and Independence parties to run for the United States Senate.B1More Violence Against Drivers  A livery-cab driver who chased a suspected robber on foot on the Lower East Side was shot in the most serious of six violent incidents over the weekend involving cabbies.B7New Plan for City's Waste  Mayor Giuliani has sharply revised his long-term plan for disposing the city's household garbage. The new plan scraps proposals to build a waste plant in the Red Hook section of Brooklyn, and a somewhat smaller plant near Hunts Point in the Bronx, and would make greater use the city's existing network of smaller transfer stations.B3ARTSE1-8A Star Denounces Producers  Patrick Stewart, the star of Arthur Miller's new drama on Broadway, ''The Ride Down Mount Morgan,'' stunned audiences at curtain calls on Saturday -- and Broadway circles in general -- by angrily denouncing the producers, including the Shubert Organization, for what he called a failure to promote the show.B4China Relics Auctioned  Christie's auctioned two relics that the Chinese government, in objecting to the sale, said had been looted from an imperial palace 140 years ago.E3OBITUARIESA21SPORTSMONDAYD1-10Knicks Sweep Raptors  The Knicks defeated the Raptors, 87-80, in the N.B.A. playoffs and advanced to the second round.D1In other playoff games, the Timberwolves defeated the Trail Blazers, 94-87, and the Kings beat the Lakers, 99-91.D6BUSINESS DAYC1-22ABC Off Some Cable Systems  The ABC television network went dark on Time Warner Cable systems in several major markets early this morning as talks between the network's parent company, the Walt Disney Company, and the cable company broke down.A1Calm Over Plan for Microsoft  Few in the Seattle region, where the company has its headquarters, are panicking over the idea of breaking up Microsoft. Some express an almost messianic faith in the company's chairman, Bill Gates, who has said ''no one should think that shareholder value would be preserved.''A16Software developers' reactions to the government's proposal to break up Microsoft seem muted, or outright skeptical, with some saying the plan is too backward looking.C1Stock analysts poring over Friday's filings in the government's plan said the affidavit defending splitting Microsoft in two fell short of justifying why a breakup would be good for shareholders.C1Publicis May Acquire Y.& R.  The French advertising company Publicis is close to reaching an agreement to acquire Young & Rubicam for about $5 billion, executives close to the talks said.C1Mobile-Phone Talks in Europe  Royal KPN, the largest telephone operator in The Netherlands, is in talks with Telefonica of Spain and several other companies about merging their mobile telephone operations in an effort to create a European mobile network.C14MP3.com Optimistic on Deal  The online music service MP3.com expressed guarded confidence about reaching a settlement with the Recording Industry Association of America, following a federal court ruling on Friday that MP3.com had violated copyright law by creating an online database of 80,000 major-label recordings.C6Business DigestC1EDITORIALA22-23Editorials: Mr. Lott's reform charade; democracies and their police; a fresh voice for Turkey; the impact of health care reviews.Columns: William Safire, Bob Herbert.BridgeE6TV ListingsE7CrosswordE4WeatherD10Public LivesA14
Forget Hillary and Rudy. Never mind George W. and Al Gore. For political insiders from here to Albany, the race to watch right now is a special election for a seat on the Nassau County Legislature.Although only about 41,000 people are eligible to vote in it, the special election that will be held on Long Island on Tuesday will determine the future of Nassau County politics and could have ramifications for those other, better-known races that are coming down the road in November.Forget Hillary and Rudy. Never mind George W. and Al Gore. For political insiders from here to Albany, the race to watch right now is a special election for a seat on the Nassau County Legislature.Although only about 41,000 people are eligible to vote in it, the special election that will be held on Long Island on Tuesday will determine the future of Nassau County politics and could have ramifications for those other, better-known races that are coming down the road in November.The Nassau race is occasioned by the death in March of Barbara Johnson, a Democrat who represented Port Washington and neighboring communities on the North Shore. The loss cost the Democrats their first majority in the legislative branch in 80 years and left it evenly divided between nine Democrats and nine Republicans, at a time when the county government is grappling with a fiscal crisis. The party that wins the election wins the decisive vote.As Darren Bloch, the chief of staff for Democrats in the Legislature, put it, ''It is a jump ball for the Legislature.''The election offers Nassau's Republican Party a rare second chance to regain some of the ground it lost in November, when it not only lost control of the Legislature but also suffered major upsets on town and local levels as voters rebelled over the financial troubles that have bedeviled the county under recent Republican stewardship.The question now is whether Nassau County's Republican machine, long a force to reckon with on the state and national levels and virtually omnipotent in local affairs, is broken down or just temporarily out of service. Since the suburbs are expected to play a pivotal role in the race for the United States Senate, it is no idle question.But winning has its risks as well. The  party that gets control of the Legislature will almost surely have to enact a series of  unpopular measures, from layoffs and service cuts to fee and tax increases, to help put the debt-ridden county back in the black. ''Does anybody really want to win this?'' remarked Howard A. Scarrow, a professor of political science at the State University at Stony Brook.The candidates all profess that they do. The Democrats chose Ms. Johnson's son, Craig Johnson, a 29-year-old bankruptcy lawyer, to run for the seat. The Republicans picked Linda Green, 52, an assistant principal and former North Hemsptead town clerk who was voted out of office during the anti-Republican backlash in November.Then there is the none-of-the-above option: Benjamin L. Zwirn, 48, a former North Hempstead town supervisor who has built a reputation as a maverick by winning elections but making many enemies in both parties along the way, is running on the Green Party line.The district is considered up for grabs. On paper, Republicans might have a slight edge: there are 16,000 registered Republicans and 15,000 registered Democrats. But there are also 10,000 unaffiliated registered voters and Democrats have had many successes here during the last decade. Ms. Johnson, a Democrat, won two-thirds of the vote in her last campaign.So far, the campaign has focused on three R's: Republicans, reassessment and residency.Mr. Johnson is largely running against the Republican Party. One of his campaign mailings attacks the Republican county executive, Thomas S. Gulotta. ''You know the old adage about the fox guarding the hen house?'' asks the brochure, which shows a fox looking at several newly hatched chicks. ''That's what it would be like if Tom Gulotta's Republican machine regained the majority in the County Legislature.''Ms. Green has tried to counter by stressing her independence from the party. ''Ladies and gentlemen, it is true I am a Republican,'' she said at a debate two weeks ago. ''And before I was a Republican, I was Linda Green. And I still am.''Ms. Green has tried to run on an anti-reassessment platform. In March, Nassau agreed to overhaul its property tax system and reassess every property in the county. The problem with the current system, critics say, is that people in poorer communities pay more than their fair share of taxes and the cash-starved county is forced to pay out hundreds of millions of dollars to people who win challenges of their taxes.But a countywide reassessment would probably raise the assessments on homes in wealthy areas like those in the district. Ms. Green has seized on the issue with campaign fliers that say, ''Linda Green will fight the Democrats' tax reassessment scheme.''Democrats respond that she is fear-mongering, and note that the countywide reassessment has already been approved and that it is not a product of the Democrats alone, since it was supported by Charles O'Shea, the Republican county assessor, Mr. Gulotta, and five out of nine Republican legislators.Mr. Zwirn is campaigning as an outsider. ''There's not a dime's worth of difference between the parties,'' he said, but officials in both parties say he spoke with them about running on their ballot lines before going on the Greens' line.Although Mr. Zwirn is running on a pledge not to raise taxes and to place a limit on the amount of increases caused by reassessment, he has attracted the most notice for his accusations that Mr. Johnson is not really a resident of the district. He faxed reporters copies of a 1999 alumni directory in which Mr. Johnson is listed at a Manhattan address, and a listing for Mr. Johnson from the Manhattan phone book.Mr. Johnson responded that while he has an apartment in Manhattan, his official residence is a house in Port Washington. He said that he has always voted in Port Washington and that his driver's license lists Port Washington as his home address.After two of Mr. Zwirn's supporters tried to have Mr. Johnson removed from the ballot this week, a State Supreme Court justice sided with Mr. Johnson and ruled that he was a legal resident of Port Washington and could run in the race.But the charge may be sticking. As he campaigned in East Hills, amid the condolences for his mother's death and promises of votes on Tuesday, he also got this question from one man he stopped on the street: ''Are you the Johnson that lives in Manhattan?''Although Mr. Johnson is favored slightly in the race, political analysts say the outcome is anyone's guess.Joseph N. Mondello, the chairman of the Nassau County Republican Party, made no secret of how difficult he expected the race to be when he announced the selection of Ms. Green. ''This is an uphill battle for us, no question,'' he said at the time, and since then he has flooded the district with volunteers distributing leaflets for her.The Democrats were planning to spend about $60,000 on the race, nearly three times as much as the Republicans said they would spend. Mr. Zwirn said he expected to spend  $10,000 to $12,000.''This will be a referendum on whether the troubles of the Republican machine have abated,'' said Dr. Herbert D. Rosenbaum, an emeritus professor of political science at Hofstra University. ''I would argue that the outcome hinges on the famous turnout question, which in local, off-season elections tends to be low. In this race, the well-organized campaign has a tremendous edge.''
With a fullblown attack today on Gov. George W. Bush over foreign policy, Vice President Al Gore seemed to be executing a classic incumbent strategy, one made especially classic by Governor Bush's father, then the vice president, against another sitting governor in 1988.The Gore campaign has been sifting through the detritus of the elder Mr. Bush's steamrolling of Gov. Michael S. Dukakis of Massachusetts and has unearthed useful lessons. Those lessons, for an incumbent vice president defending a relatively popular administration against a sitting governor, are becoming increasingly evident. The basic thrust: try to hamstring the opponent by raising questions about his record and his readiness to be president.With a fullblown attack today on Gov. George W. Bush over foreign policy, Vice President Al Gore seemed to be executing a classic incumbent strategy, one made especially classic by Governor Bush's father, then the vice president, against another sitting governor in 1988.The Gore campaign has been sifting through the detritus of the elder Mr. Bush's steamrolling of Gov. Michael S. Dukakis of Massachusetts and has unearthed useful lessons. Those lessons, for an incumbent vice president defending a relatively popular administration against a sitting governor, are becoming increasingly evident. The basic thrust: try to hamstring the opponent by raising questions about his record and his readiness to be president.Neither the Gore campaign nor the Bush campaign particularly likes the analogy. The Gore team says it is having a high-minded policy debate and is not employing negative personal attacks. The Bush campaign says Mr. Gore, unlike Vice President George Bush in 1988, is misrepresenting the governor's record.Their routes may be different, but the Gore campaign arrives at the same place Governor Bush's father arrived a dozen years ago. They both present a sitting vice president as the responsible steward of the current peace and prosperity. And they both cast the challenger as risky and irresponsible and his state as an alien universe that is culturally out of the mainstream. Already, Texas has been portrayed as such an aberration that it almost resembles, well, Massachusetts in 1988.Governor Bush began this campaign much the way Governor Dukakis began his, as the respected if little-known executive of a state that had appeared to make strides economically and socially.By the end of the 1988 campaign, of course, Mr. Dukakis had become a laughingstock. His ''Massachusetts Miracle'' was in shreds. Boston Harbor had become synonymous with pollution and neglect. And Mr. Dukakis himself had become the emblem of effete liberalism, impractical ineffectuality and, perhaps worst of all, insufficient patriotism.Part of this was Mr. Dukakis's  fault. He did not think Vice President Bush's attacks were worth answering. And he slapped on a helmet and climbed into a battle tank, providing perhaps the most enduring, if hapless, image of his campaign.This time around, Mr. Gore's chief criticism of Mr. Bush was initially confined to the governor's ''risky tax scheme.'' But he has ratcheted up that criticism every day. Now the word ''risky,'' supplemented by ''irresponsible'' and ''reckless,'' is applied to the entire Bush world view. The risky tax scheme begets a risky economic plan, which encompasses risky health and education plans and so on.So in a major foreign policy speech in Boston today, Mr. Gore criticized Mr. Bush for talking about a costly and controversial Star Wars missile defense plan in his meeting with the foreign minister of Russia and said the Texan ''chose the worst possible venue in which to launch -- for lack of a better phrase -- his risky foreign policy scheme.''He continued, ''I won't even guess at the new math needed to make his risky foreign policy scheme and his risky tax scheme add up.''On the domestic policy front, Mr. Gore has portrayed Mr. Bush's Texas as a backwater with substandard education and inadequate health insurance and its residents as so gun-happy that the governor signed a bill allowing them to take weapons into churches. Further, Mr. Gore likes to link Governor Bush with the ''failed'' policies of his father and refers often to ''the Bush-Quayle recession.''Today Mr. Gore said Mr. Bush was ''stuck in a cold war mindset'' and that he would have to fill in the ''gaps'' in his knowledge of foreign policy with the right-wing isolationist ideology of Congressional Republicans like Senator Jesse Helms.But if Mr. Gore has learned from the 1988 campaign, so has Governor Bush. Instead of allowing Mr. Gore to define him the way Vice President Bush defined Governor Dukakis, Governor Bush has tried to the avoid the extremist conservative box Mr. Gore has tried to put him in.Governor Bush has spent much time reaching for the political center, especially on issues like education and health care, which have traditionally been viewed as more favorable to Democrats. And he has emphasized bipartisanship and his ability to work with Democrats.Governor Bush has also been quicker to respond to attacks than was Governor Dukakis. Unlike Mr. Dukakis, Governor Bush is not only resisting Mr. Gore's caricature of him but is constructing his own caricature of Mr. Gore, as the candidate who does not tell the truth and is bent on a campaign of destruction. The constant refrain from the Bush campaign is that Mr. Gore ''will say anything to get elected.''Mr. Gore has pushed away any suggestion that he is being negative, saying he believes the country wants a healthy debate on the issues people care about. He has already signaled what some of those issues will be and how he intends to use them, as in recent days, when he excoriated Mr. Bush's record on the environment by calling Texas the most polluted state in the country, citing Houston's chronic air pollution as an example.And while some in the Gore campaign have been studying the 1988 campaign -- its similarities include an incumbent vice president who began the campaign in double digits behind a governor -- his spokesman rejects the idea that the 1988 Bush campaign is any kind of model.''We're putting out our positive vision,'' said Chris Lehane, a spokesman for Mr. Gore. ''The difference is that in 1988, Bush's goal was to pull down Dukakis.''For an incumbent to portray a challenger as too much of a risk is hardly unprecedented. Lyndon B. Johnson's devastating ''countdown'' commercial imprinted on television viewers the image of nuclear destruction should they elect Barry Goldwater. And Jimmy Carter suggested that Ronald Reagan was too extreme to have his finger on the nuclear button.It was in this long tradition that Vice President Gore's first television commercial, once he secured the nomination, said to viewers: ''Al Gore is ready. Is George W.?''THE 2000 CAMPAIGN: THE VICE PRESIDENT
To the Editor:I am offended that Elizabeth Birch of the Human Rights Campaign, a leading gay group, saw fit to speak on behalf of the movement when she said ''we must elect Al Gore as president of the United States'' (news article, May 1).To the Editor:I am offended that Elizabeth Birch of the Human Rights Campaign, a leading gay group, saw fit to speak on behalf of the movement when she said ''we must elect Al Gore as president of the United States'' (news article, May 1).It may shock Ms. Birch, but lots of gays oppose Mr. Gore and resent being taken for granted by the Democratic Party. Like the millions of ordinary Americans of all backgrounds, we middle-of-the-road gays are still outraged by the scandals and immorality of the present administration, and we yearn for a return to decency, honesty and virtue in the White House.If that means voting for George W. Bush, so be it. We are savvy enough to balance our commitment to equal rights for gays with our commitment to the country's values and integrity.CARL BIRMAN  Brooklyn, May 1, 2000
To the Editor:Re ''What a Texas Record Can't Tell'' (Op-Ed, April 28): Paul Burka is trying to get across the point that Gov. George W. Bush should not and cannot be blamed for most of the social problems and deficiencies that Texas has because that conservative state has long-held restraints on what its governors can accomplish politically.To the Editor:Re ''What a Texas Record Can't Tell'' (Op-Ed, April 28): Paul Burka is trying to get across the point that Gov. George W. Bush should not and cannot be blamed for most of the social problems and deficiencies that Texas has because that conservative state has long-held restraints on what its governors can accomplish politically.My question is, if Governor Bush has accomplished little as Texas's chief executive, how is he qualified to serve as president of the United States? Basically, he is running without any track record. Perhaps if his name weren't Bush, he would just be one of the also-rans who took part in this year's Republican primaries.HOWARD MANAS  Parlin, N.J., April 28, 2000
Gov. George W. Bush can only hope that his meeting next week with Senator John McCain goes as well as Mr. McCain's meeting with Vice President Al Gore.Mr. McCain met on Sunday for about 20 minutes with Mr. Gore at the Naval Observatory in Washington, the vice president's official residence. Both were appearing on CNN's ''Late Edition,'' which was being filmed at the residence. When Mr. Gore learned on Saturday that Mr. McCain would be under his own roof on Sunday, he called the Arizona senator and invited him to come over early for a private chat.Gov. George W. Bush can only hope that his meeting next week with Senator John McCain goes as well as Mr. McCain's meeting with Vice President Al Gore.Mr. McCain met on Sunday for about 20 minutes with Mr. Gore at the Naval Observatory in Washington, the vice president's official residence. Both were appearing on CNN's ''Late Edition,'' which was being filmed at the residence. When Mr. Gore learned on Saturday that Mr. McCain would be under his own roof on Sunday, he called the Arizona senator and invited him to come over early for a private chat.''We're friends,'' Mr. Gore told reporters later, noting that the two had served in the House and Senate together. ''It's not that complicated.''He said he understood that Mr. McCain, who has suspended his own presidential campaign, would be endorsing Mr. Bush, a fellow Republican, for president. But ever since Mr. Gore locked up the Democratic nomination, he has been invoking Mr. McCain's name and making an overt play for his independent-minded supporters.On Sunday night, Mr. Gore seemed eager to fill reporters in on the details of their get-together, uncharacteristically allowing camera crews to film him on his airplane discussing the matter as he flew from Boston to Washington.Mr. Gore said the two discussed campaign finance reform, Mr. McCain's signature issue and one that Mr. Gore is advancing in his campaign.''We talked about how to move the issue forward,'' the vice president said, adding that he expected future sessions with Mr. McCain on the subject.Mr. Gore has said the McCain-Feingold proposal to eliminate so-called soft money from campaigns would be his No. 1 domestic initiative, a move some critics suspect is an effort to inoculate himself against criticism that his own fund-raising has been too aggressive. The Sunday session thus struck some as an effort by Mr. Gore to bask in Mr. McCain's credibility on the issue, or what the political columnist Mark Shields calls ''innocence by association.''The vice president also wanted to signal that he could work with Republicans, a theme that Mr. Bush has emphasized recently while suggesting that Mr. Gore was excessively partisan.''I will regularly and routinely reach across party lines,'' Mr. Gore said on Sunday night, adding that his ''natural instincts'' were to work in a bipartisan manner.Mr. Gore went even further in this direction by suggesting, in answer to a question, that he might even name a Republican as his vice president. ''I think that's unlikely,'' he said, but ''I would not rule it out.''While the cameras were still rolling, Mr. Gore also poked fun at his own comments about the Elian Gonzalez case, which has caused him much political heartache.But the biggest laugh came when Mr. Gore referred to a ''bit part'' that he had played in a well-received video that President Clinton had made to show at the annual White House correspondents' dinner on Saturday night.A reporter on the plane remembered that Mr. Gore had made a brief appearance in the video but said, ''I've forgotten what it was,'' inadvertently summarizing Mr. Gore's longtime difficulty in establishing himself outside Mr. Clinton's shadow.
The Clinton administration said today that the federal government expected to pay off substantially more of the national debt this year than previously projected.In a statement, President Clinton said the federal government intended to pay off $216 billion in debt during the fiscal year that ends Sept. 30, or 6.2 percent of the $3.5 trillion in national debt held by the public.The Clinton administration said today that the federal government expected to pay off substantially more of the national debt this year than previously projected.In a statement, President Clinton said the federal government intended to pay off $216 billion in debt during the fiscal year that ends Sept. 30, or 6.2 percent of the $3.5 trillion in national debt held by the public.In February, the administration projected that it would pay off $167 billion this year.Treasury Secretary Lawrence H. Summers said in a news conference at the White House today that the larger reduction was the result of the strong economy generating higher than expected tax revenues.Mr. Summers said there had been a surge in payments for 1999 tax liabilities made around the April 15 filing deadline and in corporate and individual tax payments so far in 2000.By the end of the fiscal year, he said, the government will have paid off $350 billion in debt since fiscal year 1998, reflecting the shift from decades of federal budget deficits to large and growing surpluses.Mr. Summers said debt reduction in April, May and June, the three months in which the government typically takes in the most money, should total $185 billion, up from $114 billion in the same period last year.''I think what we can take satisfaction in is that as a country we are not just making continued progress in reducing our national debt, but we are making progress at an accelerated pace,'' he said.The Treasury Department is reducing the debt by rebuying bonds and other securities it has issued and by not renewing others on maturity.Administration officials used the news to strengthen their claim to being a force for fiscal prudence and the guardian of economic expansion. They sought to contrast their focus on debt reduction to calls from Republicans, who have a majority in Congress, and from Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, the presumptive Republican presidential nominee, for big tax cuts.''We should not jeopardize the longest economic expansion in history with risky tax cuts that threaten our fiscal discipline,'' Mr. Clinton said.Republicans said that they, not the administration, deserved credit for putting the government back in the black and that only by returning the surplus to taxpayers in the form of tax cuts could they stop Democrats  from spending the surplus.Republicans said that by keeping increases in government spending in check, there would be plenty of money for sizable tax cuts and for debt reduction.Mr. Summers said the administration had not yet calculated a new surplus estimate for the fiscal year. In February, the administration estimated that the total surplus this year would be $179 billion, including $148 billion from excess Social Security payroll tax revenues.Today's figures suggested that the surplus would be tens of billions of dollars higher than projected -- an improvement that would probably ripple into the surplus projection for next year, giving Congress a bigger pool of money as it turns this week to writing the spending bills that would finance the government's operations in 2001.
Fighting to defeat the government's proposal to break the company in two, Microsoft plans to ask the trial judge next week for broad authority to obtain hundreds of pages of government records on the case, and for permission to summon witnesses to argue that the proposal is unwarranted and out of bounds.''Their extreme request for relief invites questions on how they came to the observations and conclusions in their declaration,'' William H. Neukom, Microsoft's general counsel, said yesterday.Fighting to defeat the government's proposal to break the company in two, Microsoft plans to ask the trial judge next week for broad authority to obtain hundreds of pages of government records on the case, and for permission to summon witnesses to argue that the proposal is unwarranted and out of bounds.''Their extreme request for relief invites questions on how they came to the observations and conclusions in their declaration,'' William H. Neukom, Microsoft's general counsel, said yesterday.The effort could take many months, going ''well into the fall,'' Mr. Neukom said. Government officials called the company's action simply a stalling tactic, possibly intended to delay the ruling until the next administration took office. Microsoft denied that intent, and outside experts noted that the company might not gain any particular advantage from a delay.If a new administration were more sympathetic to Microsoft, it could in theory settle or drop the federal case at any time -- even if an appeal were before the Supreme Court. But the case brought by the 19 state attorneys general who are the Justice Department's partners in the case would remain active. The attorneys general have repeatedly said they would persevere no matter what the Justice Department did.Microsoft says it has lobbied both likely presidential nominees, Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush, to influence their views of the case and to counter lobbying by its competitors. Mr. Bush has made a few unspecific comments about the case sympathetic to Microsoft, while Mr. Gore has declined to discuss it.The Justice Department and 17 of the state attorneys general filed their remedy request with the court in Washington on Friday. It asked Judge Thomas Penfield Jackson to split the company in two. One company would hold the Windows operating system and the other Microsoft's application programs. The proposal would also impose a range of restrictions on conduct while the breakup is carried out. Two states declined to join in the proposal.Microsoft is to file its response by May 10, and will make its formal request for the information and witness testimony. The government says gathering the information can be done in two or three weeks. But while Mr. Neukom said Microsoft earnestly wanted to move the case to the Court of Appeals as soon as possible, he said Microsoft still would need the extra time.Of the Microsoft request for discovery, one person close to the government's case said, ''If a person is convicted of bank robbery, does he have the right to find out how the prosecutor came up with his sentence?''Microsoft's stock took a beating last week after the government's intention to seek a breakup was reported. But yesterday, in the first trading session since the government plan was formally submitted, the stock rose $3.6875, closing at $73.4375.The judge is not obligated to accept Microsoft's request. Judge Jackson has said he wants to complete the remedy phase quickly. Microsoft made a similar request for months of delay to prepare for the opening of the trial two years ago and Judge Jackson rejected it.The Microsoft request for more information and for witnesses is just one of the company's tactics in fending off a possible breakup. For example, Microsoft has asserted that the government proposal made expansive claims for the increased competition it says would come from a breakup. Company lawyers call that sheer speculation and Microsoft further says the government ignored the efficiency benefits that come from having one corporation making both Windows and office applications that work within that operating system.Robert E. Hall, an economist at Stanford University who advised the Justice Department on an earlier Microsoft case, predicts that the company's lawyers will investigate that issue in court.While the proposal is to break the company up, he said the economics were similar to those of two companies in adjacent markets that had merged. And the Justice Department's own guidelines, Mr. Hall notes, call for the government to give relatively more weight to efficiencies in such mergers.''There's a thoughtless neglect of efficiencies in the government's analysis, and I think that will be an attractive target for Microsoft,'' Mr. Hall said.For its part, Microsoft already argues that the government's breakup proposal would make it far more difficult, if not impossible, for the company to develop innovative products that result from putting together a wide range of software technologies.For example, Microsoft's Pocket PC software for handheld computers combines Windows software and technology of the Microsoft suite of business applications called Office in one product. Similarly, its planned computer game product, the X-box, to go on sale next year in competition with Sony, Nintendo and Sega, uses technology from both Microsoft's operating systems and applications divisions.But a government official said nothing would prevent the two new companies resulting from a breakup from collaborating on a product in most circumstances, though the proposal does include specific anticollusion provisions.The government's plan says the company's software tools programs, used to create other programs, would go to the applications company -- even the developers making tools for Windows. That might seem to be an inefficient step, but it may not be the wayward move it seems, according to some computer experts.Prof. Michael Cusumano at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, co-author of ''Microsoft Secrets,'' said there was already a lively market for makers of Windows development tools. Though skeptical that the government proposal would bring much new competition, Mr. Cusumano was also unconvinced by some of Microsoft's arguments that the software industry would suffer from lost efficiency.''There will be enormous incentives for the two companies to work together,'' he said.Along with those arguments, Brad Smith, deputy general counsel for Microsoft, has extensively researched previous antitrust cases and said none of them offers a clear parallel.In Friday's proposal, and in public statements since then, Justice Department officials pointed to the breakup of AT&T as a precedent. But Mr. Smith argued today that the precedent was two sided.While AT&T was broken up as part of a settlement in 1984, the government also lifted decades of regulations that had controlled AT&T's business practices. ''And it was that antiregulatory aspect of the decree that allowed AT&T enter new markets and grow,'' Mr. Smith said, ''while this proposal puts into place many regulatory restrictions on our behavior.''A government official noted, however, that some new regulations were also imposed on AT&T and its former subsidiaries in 1984, many of which remain in place today.Mr. Neukom also pointed to another piece of research from Mr. Smith's work. ''Never,'' he said, ''has there been a litigated antitrust case at the end of which a federal court has been asked to order the divestiture'' of part of a unified company.In all of the previous cases, he and Mr. Smith said, the government split up a company along clear divisional lines -- AT&T and its local phone companies, Paramount Pictures and its chain of movie theaters.Microsoft, in contrast, is a single company with different products but less clear internal divisions. The government asserts, however, that the proposed split falls across a clear divisional line at Microsoft.
THE STATESLAST TO HONOR KING  With the signature of Gov. Jim Hodges, South Carolina yesterday became the last state to honor the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. with an official holiday. The bill was signed despite protests from the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People, which had opposed the legislation because it also created Confederate Memorial Day on May 10. The organization said two such contrasting ideologies should not be linked. A spokesman for Mr. Hodges said he would have preferred a bill honoring only Dr. King but had to accept the Confederate holiday as the price for passage. The N.A.A.C.P. has also objected to a Senate bill, now before the House, to move the Confederate battle flag from the Capitol dome to a memorial in front of the building. Meanwhile, officials in North Carolina said that despite the furor in South Carolina, a Confederate flag would be over the Capitol in Raleigh on May 10, as is required annually under a legislative decree. The flag also is flown every Jan. 19, Robert E. Lee's birthday. Representative Eva Clayton said the dome was not the proper place for such a flag.David Firestone (NYT)THE STATESLAST TO HONOR KING  With the signature of Gov. Jim Hodges, South Carolina yesterday became the last state to honor the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. with an official holiday. The bill was signed despite protests from the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People, which had opposed the legislation because it also created Confederate Memorial Day on May 10. The organization said two such contrasting ideologies should not be linked. A spokesman for Mr. Hodges said he would have preferred a bill honoring only Dr. King but had to accept the Confederate holiday as the price for passage. The N.A.A.C.P. has also objected to a Senate bill, now before the House, to move the Confederate battle flag from the Capitol dome to a memorial in front of the building. Meanwhile, officials in North Carolina said that despite the furor in South Carolina, a Confederate flag would be over the Capitol in Raleigh on May 10, as is required annually under a legislative decree. The flag also is flown every Jan. 19, Robert E. Lee's birthday. Representative Eva Clayton said the dome was not the proper place for such a flag.David Firestone (NYT)BABBITT TO RETURN HOME  There has been considerable speculation in Arizona that once Bruce Babbitt finished his tour as secretary of the interior, he would return to the state to run for governor, a job he held from 1978 to 1986. But Mr. Babbitt said over the weekend that he had other plans. He would return to Arizona, he told The Arizona Republic, but not to run for governor. ''I'm out of politics, but I'm back to Arizona,'' he said. ''I'm a little homesick. I want to re-engage as a citizen.'' He did not say what he planned to do. But he made it clear that he was tired of Washington's ''witch-hunting mentality,'' referring to the 19-month investigation by an independendent counsel into his handling of permits for Indian reservation casinos. He was cleared of any wrongdoing. ''Maybe I was the poster child for the repeal of the independent counsel statute,'' he said.B. Drummond Ayres Jr. (NYT)THE DEMOCRATSRUBIN PLAYS DOWN SPOT ON TICKET  Former Treasury Secretary Robert E. Rubin, one of many prominent Democrats mentioned as a potential running mate for Vice President Al Gore, seemed to reject the idea yesterday, calling it ''a curious notion.'' Discussing economic policy and what he saw as key issues in the campaign, Mr. Rubin said that while he has been around politics for many years, including a stint as a Democratic fund-raiser, he viewed running for and serving in office as a special field, ''something unto itself.'' Mr. Rubin suggested that it was unwise to choose a nominee who had not been tested by other campaigns. ''I have never run for office,'' he said. ''You don't want somebody in a presidential campaign, which is the ultimate of political experience in this country, who hasn't been tested by running before.'' Mr. Rubin spoke on Political Points, the Webcast of The New York Times and ABC News.(NYT)THE GREENSNADER COURTS AUTO WORKERS  The consumer advocate and Green Party presidential candidate Ralph Nader discussed an endorsement yesterday with leaders of the United Automobile Workers in Detroit. Mr. Nader said that he did not directly ask for an endorsement and that the union would not endorse a candidate until after a Congressional vote, scheduled for late May, on establishing permanent normal trade relations with China. Mr. Nader, the auto workers and other major unions oppose the bill. Instead of asking for endorsements, Mr. Nader said: ''I just tell people what we're doing.'' Union officials were unavailable for comment. The union, which has criticized President Clinton's trade policies, broke with the A.F.L.-C.I.O. in October, when the labor federation endorsed Vice President Al Gore.(AP)
Today we're going to take a break from the unending excitement of the presidential race to talk about hog lagoons.Industrial livestock farming is probably not a big problem in your neighborhood, but really, people, how can you resist a controversy in which the villain is called Big Pork, and the possible repercussions include flesh-eating algae? If hog farming weren't a political issue, it would be a TV movie in sweeps month.Today we're going to take a break from the unending excitement of the presidential race to talk about hog lagoons.Industrial livestock farming is probably not a big problem in your neighborhood, but really, people, how can you resist a controversy in which the villain is called Big Pork, and the possible repercussions include flesh-eating algae? If hog farming weren't a political issue, it would be a TV movie in sweeps month.It's already played a role in today's North Carolina gubernatorial primary. ''If I'm elected governor we're going to end hog lagoons,'' vowed Lt. Gov. Dennis Wicker in a famous TV ad.''Hog lagoons'' sound like pigs in bathing suits with mermaid tails, swimming around a la Esther Williams. Actually lagoon is a fancy term for a humongous pit of manure. It's a critical element in the brave new world of pork production, in which hogs are often owned by the packers but raised by contractors in a system that bears a striking resemblance to a fast-food franchise. One of the great features of the system is that while the big guys own the hogs, the little contractors own the waste. It drains into lagoons, and if one of them ruptures or overflows or leaks, do not go looking to the packer for restitution.''There are different smells to it. One day it might smell like ammonia. Another day it might have an almost burning-type smell that hurts your nose,'' said Karen Priest, a North Carolina homeowner who woke up one morning and discovered that 7,300 hogs and two lagoons had moved in next door.In many places you can't put up a tree house without somebody seeking an injunction. But in North Carolina, thanks to the tireless efforts of a former state senator named Wendell Murphy, monster hog farms had free right-of-way into the countryside. By a remarkable coincidence, Mr. Murphy happened to be a major hog producer himself, as well as a great pal and major contributor to Jim Hunt, the outgoing governor.Thanks to its hospitable attitude, over the last decade North Carolina has been inundated with oversized hog farms and their lagoons, along with the largest meat-packing plant in the world. They're crammed into  the eastern section of the state, an area that is made up in large part of wetlands and flood plains.Let's put the hog lagoons in the flood plains. People, is that great planning or what?Nitrogen from animal wastes seems responsible for the sudden appearance of a flesh-eating algae known as Pfiesteria in state waters. During one particularly grisly period in the mid-90's, North Carolinians were discovering piles of fish, laden with sores and gasping for breath, on the riverbanks.''I want to see the scientific evidence that says it's swine waste that creates this problem,'' said Al Tank of the National Pork Producers Council. There are, of course, other potential culprits. But except for private golf courses, you'd be hard pressed to name any that have as little redeeming social value.Besides the smell and the environmental impact, the big farms are driving small hog producers out of business. Pork prices for the consumer aren't dropping. The hogs  can't be enjoying their lives -- ''Where is Kim Basinger when we need her?'' asked Ms. Priest. To top it all off, the jobs created at the contract farms and meat-packing plants are so lousy that even residents of a poor, rural area won't take them.You'd think that the candidates for governor would be leaping over each other to take on this issue. They're all middle-aged lawyers, so interchangeable that their own mothers might be hard pressed to cull one from the herd, and this pig thing is definitely the most interesting aspect to the race. But the two Democrats have moved on to the more traditional topics of education and character assassination. The Republicans have kept their distance altogether.Maybe the only thing to do is go national. Next time Al Gore or George Bush comes to your town, ask him what he'd do to crack down on hog lagoons. One of them might have an answer, and at least it might liven things up.
INTERNATIONALA3-16TV Confession in Iran At Jew's Espionage Trial  The first of 13 Jewish men charged with spying went on trial in Shiraz, and Iranian television showed him making an admission that he had spied for Israel. The public confession came after the government refused to allow family members, human rights groups or the public to witness the opening of the trial.A1INTERNATIONALA3-16TV Confession in Iran At Jew's Espionage Trial  The first of 13 Jewish men charged with spying went on trial in Shiraz, and Iranian television showed him making an admission that he had spied for Israel. The public confession came after the government refused to allow family members, human rights groups or the public to witness the opening of the trial.A1Few Takers on China Visit  Only two congressmen undecided on whether to vote to give China permanent normal trade relations accepted an administration invitation to let a Cabinet officer lead them on a trip to China to gauge trade and human rights conditions.A1European Opposes U.S. Plan  The foreign policy chief for the European Union, Javier Solana, said European officials were concerned about possible damage that the Clinton administration's plan for a missile defense system could do to Europe's security ties with the United States.A16May Day Mass With the Pope  Pope John Paul II, pre-empting the trade unions' traditional hold on May 1, presided over a workers' rally that combined a solemn Catholic Mass with a raucous rock concert dedicated to third world debt relief. But the day was less about the Vatican or pop music than about the changes it showed taking place in Italy.A6Dispute on Red Cross Symbols  Concern is spreading among international relief organizations that the American Red Cross may be on the verge of withdrawing from the International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies because the umbrella organization has not agreed to admit an Israeli contingent under a Star of David flag.A8Philippines Hostages Examined  A doctor made the first visit to a group of 21 hostages held by armed rebels of the Islamic separatist group Abu Sayyaf. The hostages were suffering from hunger and diarrhea and some pleaded for water, as 50 to 70 rebels guarded the area. On a nearby island, another group of Abu Sayyaf rebels escaped with their 27 hostages when government troops overran their mountain base over the weekend, the military said.A5Turkey Leader Lacks Votes  Parliament failed for a second time to muster the two-thirds vote necessary to elect Ahmet Necdet Sezer, the reformist candidate for president favored by the leaders of all five parties, although Mr. Sezer finished far ahead of other candidates, with 314 votes. The next ballot is set for Friday; in that round, just a simple majority of 276 will be necessary.A12World BriefingA10SPORTSD1-8Devils Lead Series, 2-1  The Devils beat the Toronto Maple Leafs, 5-1, in Game 3 of their five-of-seven-game playoff series.D1NATIONALA18-25Some Big Corporations Are Forsaking Soft Money  Soft-money donations are on a pace to set a record, even though many big corporations have stopped making them because executives are disillusioned with the process and feel there are better ways to spend their companies' money and still stay politically involved. But other corporate interests, senior executives and unions are increasing their unrestricted gifts to political parties.A1McCain-Gore Meeting  Senator John McCain and Vice President Al Gore met for 20 minutes on Sunday. Mr. Gore said they discussed changing campaign financing, Mr. McCain's signature issue and one that Mr. Gore is also advancing. Mr. McCain is to meet with Gov. George W. Bush next week.A24Document Request Rebuffed  The White House said it would invoke executive privilege and lawyer-client privilege, as it told the House Government Reform Committee that it would not surrender some documents subpoenaed in an inquiry about missing e-mail messages. The action prompted an angry reply by the committee's chairman, Dan Burton.A23Challenging Asylum Case  Elian Gonzalez was pressured by ''distant'' relatives to sign a political asylum claim that he neither wanted nor understood, a lawyer for his father said in federal court papers.A22Ruling on Retroactive Law  The Supreme Court overturned a Texas man's sex abuse conviction on the ground that a change in state law had made it easier for the prosecution to prove its case than at the time the crime was committed.A24Judge Mediates Settlement  Lawyers said a tentative settlement had been reached in a 16-year-old case involving accusations that Baltimore public schools had woefully neglected physically and mentally disabled students. The settlement was reached through the mediation of a federal judge, a procedure thought to have been used only once before, and then unsuccessfully, in the Microsoft antitrust case.A18Retiring 6.2% of National Debt  The government said it would pay off $216 billion of the $3.5 trillion national debt by Sept. 30, the end of the fiscal year. In February, the projection was $167 billion. The Treasury secretary said the bigger payment resulted from the booming economy and a growth in tax revenue.A23NEW YORK/REGIONB1-10State Challenges U.S. Law In Bid for Cleaner Air  The Legislature gave final passage to a bill intended to reduce air pollution drifting into New York from coal-burning power plants in the Midwest and South. The measure would stop New York companies from keeping money they make by selling pollution credits, earned by cleaning their own smokestacks, to major polluters elsewhere. The action is the first by a state that directly challenges a major provision of the Federal Clean Air Act of 1990.A1Postponing 'Monologues' Role  Donna Hanover will not take the lead in ''The Vagina Monologues'' on May 30 because of ''family circumstances.'' Her husband, Mayor Giuliani, has disclosed he has prostate cancer.B1Catskills Casino Plan  Park Place Entertainment signed an option to buy Kutsher's Country Club, the oldest resort in the Catskills, to create an entertainment and gambling complex that would be owned by the St. Regis Mohawks.B1OBITUARIESC26-27Pham Van Dong  An early revolutionary who became premier of North Vietnam after independence from France in 1954 and head of the government of all Vietnam from 1976 to 1987, he was 94.C27David Mahoney  Sometimes described as the foremost lay advocate of research into the brain, he was 76.C26SCIENCE TIMESF1-12Roots of the Human Family Tree  Geneticists tracing the DNA patterns found in people throughout the world have identified lineages descended from 10 sons of a genetic Adam and 18 daughters of Eve.F1Health & FitnessF6BUSINESS DAYC1-26Time Warner-ABC Dispute  Time Warner Cable removed ABC television stations from cable systems it runs in seven cities serving 3.5 million homes, in a dispute with ABC's parent, Walt Disney, over fees for Disney cable channels.A1Actors in Commercials Strike  The Screen Actors Guild and the American Federation of Television and Radio Artists told their members not to work on television and radio commercials until an agreement was reached with advertisers.C2Microsoft on Counterattack  Microsoft plans to ask the judge in its antitrust case for broad access to government records and for permission to summon witnesses, in arguing against the government's proposal to break up the company.C1New Long-Distance Plan  Bell Atlantic is expected to introduce a calling plan today offering long-distance interstate calls for 8 cents a minute at any time, without monthly fees or minimum charges.C1A European Exchange Merger  The London and Frankfurt stock exchanges are expected to announce a merger tomorrow.C1Business DigestC1FASHIONB11ARTSE1-10EDITORIALA26-27Editorials: The blackout battle; peace overtures in Colombia; Dudley Clendinen on the gay march in Washington.  Columns: Thomas L. Friedman, Gail Collins.CrosswordE4  TV ListingsE10  Public LivesB2  WeatherD7
Soft-money donations to the political parties are on a pace to set a record this year, but more and more large corporations have quietly stopped giving them.In some cases, senior executives say they want to distance themselves from what they describe as the capital's unseemly culture of cash and influence, while others acknowledge that their companies are simply not getting much in return for the money.Soft-money donations to the political parties are on a pace to set a record this year, but more and more large corporations have quietly stopped giving them.In some cases, senior executives say they want to distance themselves from what they describe as the capital's unseemly culture of cash and influence, while others acknowledge that their companies are simply not getting much in return for the money.Thirty-one corporations that in each previous election cycle since 1993-94 contributed at least $100,000  in soft money -- unlimited and largely unregulated gifts to the parties --  have not donated any soft money in  the current cycle, covering the last 15 months, according to a computerized study of Federal Election Commission records. The list includes prolific past contributors like Revlon, Advanced Micro Devices, Miramax Films, and Starwood Hotels and  Resorts.None of the 31 companies have made statements announcing an end to their soft-money contributions, and many still make much smaller, federally regulated donations through political action committees. But some executives confirmed, although not for attribution, that their companies had adopted, or were weighing, a permanent ban on writing soft-money checks.Only a few large companies --  General Motors, Monsanto, AlliedSignal, Time Warner, none of them among the most recent 31 -- have  formally announced in recent years that they have sworn off soft money.Few corporations have followed suit, in at least some cases because they do not want to risk angering legislators in Washington. ''There are more and more companies out there who are refusing to give money, but they are not advertising their decision,'' said Charles E. M. Kolb,  president of the Committee for Economic Development, an association of corporate executives fighting for a campaign finance overhaul that would outlaw soft money. ''I suspect that there are more and more companies asking themselves if this is really worth it. What's just as interesting, though, is the fact that companies are scared to tell people.''Several executives said their corporations had stopped giving soft money because they had found better use of their resources, like lobbying, contributing to political action committees and acting as hosts for  fund-raising events. Others have stopped giving because they believe that soft money plays an unhealthy role in the political process.While more companies quietly join the ranks of those forgoing soft-money donations, other corporate interests, senior executives and labor unions are redoubling them. Since January 1999, the Democratic and Republican Parties have raised  $160.5 million in soft money, according to data compiled last week by the nonpartisan watchdog Common Cause. That was nearly double the $84.6 million in soft money raised by the parties in the first 15 months of the 1996 election cycle. By November, the parties will have raised nearly $500 million in soft money, some experts predict, as against $262 million in the 1996 cycle.But the addition of 31 companies to the roster of those turning their backs on giving soft money does add muscle to the effort of two organizations of corporate leaders that are pushing for a soft-money ban.The effort began in 1995, when Jerome Kohlberg, a founder of the leveraged buyout firm Kohlberg Kravis Roberts & Company, created  Campaign for America to fight for an  overhaul of the nation's campaign finance system. Mr. Kohlberg is being assisted by Warren E. Buffett, the acclaimed value investor and chief executive of Berkshire Hathaway. Last fall, Campaign for America reported that 121 companies that  had given at least $100,000 each in 1994 or 1996 had since stopped contributing soft money.The other group, Mr. Kolb's Committee for Economic Development, has an even larger number of corporate executives, although not all of them have persuaded their companies to stop giving soft money.A senior vice president at one company that has stopped giving soft-money donations said that ''there was not much benefit'' to them, especially inasmuch as membership fees of the parties' most elite donor clubs had jumped to $250,000 from $100,000.''What happens is by the time you give the base amount to the House Republicans, Senate Republicans, House Democrats and Senate Democrats, it costs the company a total of $60,000 and you find you don't get a lot of action for it,'' this executive said. ''As companies go through cost-cutting measures, it's an expense that is harder to justify.''This executive's company, which stopped giving soft money in late 1998, has since found no negative ramifications in its dealings with lawmakers. ''When we were giving $10,000 or $15,000,'' the officer said,  ''it was never enough; you are constantly asked for more. The no-money pledge is better than the some-money pledge.''Some longtime fund-raisers and political strategists say they have seen recent signs of what they call ''donor fatigue,'' especially among corporate executives who are bombarded with solicitations for the parties' elite donor clubs and almost weekly black-tie dinners and political retreats at resort hotels. The fund-raisers say the fatigue is the fault of both parties' enormous appetite for soft money.''Just in the last few weeks, I have had several clients of mine say they are getting out of this soft-money business,'' said Lanny J. Davis, a lawyer and lobbyist at Patton Boggs.''Both political parties have gotten so excessive in trying to beat the other in the soft-money hunt,'' Mr. Davis said. ''I'm part of the problem, and I've never seen such disgust with the practice in all my years here. It has reached critical mass.''In past election years, the Democratic National Committee and the Republican National Committee were the most aggressive soft-money solicitors. This year, however, the Senate and House fund-raising committees of each party are also pushing hard to collect big soft-money  checks. With the battle for control of  Congress intensifying, many donors are being solicited by multiple party committees at the same time, exhausting some supporters.Other fund-raisers, however, play down the danger of donor exhaustion, noting that more corporations are writing larger checks than ever.Last week, for example, the Republican National Committee brought in $21.3 million -- the most ever raised in a single event -- at its  gala in Washington saluting the party's apparent presidential nominee, Gov. George W. Bush. The Republicans received six-figure contributions -- and fund-raising assistance -- from Philip Morris, AT&T and the National Rifle Association, all three of which are among the most generous soft-money contributors to the party this year. The Democrats hope  to raise a similar amount at a tribute to President Clinton later this month.One longtime Republican lobbyist  predicted that more corporations would shun soft-money giving if they learned that competitors were doing the same. ''I think we are going to see a rush to the exit, if not a stampede,'' the lobbyist said. ''People are beginning to say it does not make sense in the context of our budgeting and our giving.''Mr. Kolb, whose Committee for  Economic Development has enlisted more than 250 executives and retired executives to endorse a soft-money ban, said an interesting question would be whether companies that had stopped giving believed that their interests were given short shrift by Congress as a result.General Motors, which stopped soft-money giving in 1997, thinks not. Bill Noack, a G.M. spokesman, said the company had found that its decision had not affected relations with Congress at all.''There are so many issues that affect us -- the environment, safety and trade -- there is something every day,'' Mr. Noack said. ''And I can't say our decision has made an impact at all.''(The company, through its political action committee, still makes  regulated donations, with a $5,000 legal maximum, to federal candidates.)Like G.M., Monsanto, which had given $88,700 in soft money during the 1995-96 election cycle, stopped giving it in 1997. And like G.M., St. Louis-based Monsanto, which merged in April with Pharmacia & Upjohn, found that relations with Congress were unaffected, a spokeswoman said.''Before we gave -- and after we stopped giving -- we always had wonderful relationships with the members in Congress who represent our company in Missouri,'' said the spokeswoman, Linda Fisher, Pharmacia's vice president for government affairs. ''We support them through our PAC and fund-raisers, and we have found that to be the most successful way to have our voice heard.''Among the 31 companies that have most recently abandoned soft-money giving -- identified through a computerized check for The New York Times by the nonpartisan Campaign Study Group of Springfield, Va. -- some, of course, may find reason to make such a donation before November.Further, among these companies,  some top executives have stepped up their contributions. The Spanos Companies, for instance, contributed $295,000 in soft money in 1997-98, and none in the last 15 months. But its chairman, Alex G. Spanos, gave $250,000 to the Republican National Committee in March 1999, records of the Federal Election Commission show.And while neither Revlon nor its chief executive, Ronald O. Perelman, has given any soft money this cycle, Mr. Perelman has given a total of $7,000 in federally restricted contributions to various candidates.
FLAGS OF OUR FATHERS  By James Bradley  With Ron Powers  Illustrated. 376 pages. Bantam Books. $24.95.John Bradley, whose image is enshrined on a bronze megalith at the Arlington National Cemetery, spent most of his life as a funeral director in the small town of Antigo, Wis., but everybody there knew that he was one of the six men who raised the famously photographed flag on Iwo Jima during World War II. He almost never talked about that exploit. Until he died, his large family in Antigo never even knew that he had won the Navy Cross. His silence created a sense that there were secrets about him to be discovered, and it led one of his sons, James, to unearth the untold story of his father and the stories of the other five men who were captured in that famous image.FLAGS OF OUR FATHERS  By James Bradley  With Ron Powers  Illustrated. 376 pages. Bantam Books. $24.95.John Bradley, whose image is enshrined on a bronze megalith at the Arlington National Cemetery, spent most of his life as a funeral director in the small town of Antigo, Wis., but everybody there knew that he was one of the six men who raised the famously photographed flag on Iwo Jima during World War II. He almost never talked about that exploit. Until he died, his large family in Antigo never even knew that he had won the Navy Cross. His silence created a sense that there were secrets about him to be discovered, and it led one of his sons, James, to unearth the untold story of his father and the stories of the other five men who were captured in that famous image.''Flags of Our Fathers'' is the product of these investigations, which James Bradley wrote in collaboration with the journalist Ron Powers.We can all be happy that Mr. Bradley, who lives in Rye, N.Y., undertook this endeavor. ''Flags of Our Fathers'' is one of the most instructive and moving books on war and its aftermath that we are likely to see, in part because it is instructive and moving in unexpected ways. On one level, Mr. Bradley has composed a touching eulogy to his father, one that honors him precisely for those qualities that did not earn him fame and recognition on Iwo Jima. He has also forged an unforgettable tableau of one of the most savage battlefields in history, a battlefield of wholesale death, mutilation and waste. Beyond that he has produced an arresting meditation on the nature of heroism, the public perception of it, and the unbridgeable chasm between the two.''Flags of Our Fathers'' is most affecting not because of its graphic portrayal of men at war, although its portrayal rivals ''Saving Private Ryan'' in its shocking, unvarnished immediacy. Mr. Bradley's evocations of six very different young men and the forces that led them to Mount Suribachi on Iwo Jima are flavorful and differentiated. But what gives this book its special power is his bittersweet understanding of the torment suffered by the surviving flag-raisers, who knew that the very act that gave them a kind of lifetime celebrity was one of the few acts carried out on Iwo Jima that was not especially noteworthy. As Mr. Bradley makes clear in a perceptive piece of historical re-examination, the incident that gave them heroic stature was insignificant, an accident, a meaningless conjunction of time and place.''He knew real heroism,'' Mr. Bradley writes of his father, one of whose rare comments about the war was that the real heroes of Iwo Jima were those who never came back. ''He could separate the real thing from the image, the fluff. And no matter how many millions of people thought otherwise, he understood that this image of heroism was not the real thing.''The title of Edmund Wilson's book on Civil War writings, ''Patriotic Gore,'' is an apt phrase for Mr. Bradley's work. As a reconstruction of one of the bloodiest battles of World War II, ''Flags of Our Fathers'' is straightforwardly patriotic. There is no historical revisionism here; in Mr. Bradley's vision, the Americans are the good guys, and the Japanese enemy, while brave, is ruthless and unspeakably cruel.At the same time, a powerful sense of ironic juxtaposition simmers beneath his narrative: between the reality experienced by the marines caught in the battle, who saw their buddies literally sliced into pieces, and the media-induced image of a flag spread out grandly in a stiff breeze.Iwo Jima, an island that lay athwart the main air route to Japan, was defended by 22,000 dug-in Japanese soldiers whose orders were to kill 10 Americans each and then to die. On the morning of Feb. 19, 1945, it was invaded by 70,000 American marines, of whom 26,000 were to be killed or wounded as they carried out the grim task of rooting out the defenders, 21,000 of whom died by the time it was over. ''Death became demystified, an occupational hazard,'' Mr. Bradley writes.On the fourth day, according to Mr. Bradley's careful reconstruction of the battle, six men put up a flag on the island's highest point. They were merely replacing a smaller flag that had been raised earlier by a different group of men. Almost by accident, an Associated Press photographer, Joe Rosenthal, snapped a picture of the second flag-raising. He did not, contrary to what is commonly said about this historic moment, pose the photograph beforehand. The picture was authentic, but the sentiment that it aroused was not. In fact, the second flag was basically unnoticed by the marines on Iwo Jima, who had cheered when the first flag went up. Still, the picture -- The Photograph, as Mr. Bradley aptly calls it -- became an icon of American patriotism, and the act of raising it was surrounded by a fabricated epic of battlefield heroics.John Bradley, who as a medical corpsman repeatedly risked his life to bring help to the wounded, was acutely aware of the fabricated nature of the flag-raising heroism, and the sharpest passages in his son's book involve a penetrating exploration of that awareness. But the junior Mr. Bradley examines the effects of The Photograph on others in this story who felt its effects. For the three men in the picture who came home, and for the families of the three men who didn't, The Photograph became mostly an affliction, a light that blinded, or a source of a perverse humiliation. Among those  men was Ira Hayes, a Pima Indian from Arizona who descended into fatal alcoholism after the war and in whom the fuss about the picture aroused a kind of fury.''Heroes?'' Mr. Bradley writes, putting himself into the psychological frame of reference of Hayes and the others. ''They had just returned from the protracted horrors of one of the deadliest and most intense battles in history, where heroes around them had acted with unimaginable bravery, suffered, and died almost by the minute. And here was an American populace driving itself into a frenzy over . . . what? Over an accidental photograph of a forgotten moment.''Mr. Bradley's book is about what might be seen as the hubris of the media and the pictorial image in American life. Like the best books, Mr. Bradley's goes beyond its narrow subject to invite reflection on deeper patterns of human behavior: in this instance, our ability to create a transcendent lie and promote it avidly despite the small voices of those few who know it to be false.BOOKS OF THE TIMES
The producers of the Broadway play ''The Ride Down Mount Morgan'' have filed charges with the stage actors union against the show's star, Patrick Stewart, citing a speech he made from the stage on Saturday accusing the producers of failing to promote the play adequately.The complaint of unprofessional conduct, filed with the Actors Equity Association, could result in Mr. Stewart's expulsion from the union, which would be a professional blight but would not bar him from Broadway productions. The union rarely expels a member, but Mr. Stewart could be reprimanded or fined if the union agrees with the producers.The producers of the Broadway play ''The Ride Down Mount Morgan'' have filed charges with the stage actors union against the show's star, Patrick Stewart, citing a speech he made from the stage on Saturday accusing the producers of failing to promote the play adequately.The complaint of unprofessional conduct, filed with the Actors Equity Association, could result in Mr. Stewart's expulsion from the union, which would be a professional blight but would not bar him from Broadway productions. The union rarely expels a member, but Mr. Stewart could be reprimanded or fined if the union agrees with the producers.Mr. Stewart and one of the producers will each have the opportunity to speak before a hearing committee of four Equity actors. The hearing has yet to be scheduled. Under Equity rules, agreeing to this procedure means that the producers have waived their right to take other legal action.Mr. Stewart declined through a spokeswoman to comment on the charges yesterday. The spokeswoman, Kelly Bush, said that Mr. Stewart had not yet been notified of the action.Gerald Schoenfeld, chairman of the Shubert Organization, along with the other producers of the show, said simply, ''In our opinion we thought the matter should be brought to Equity's attention.'' Mr. Schoenfeld said that the producers had spent more than $1 million on advertising and promotion.Mr. Stewart's speech -- which he made on behalf of himself and the play's author, Arthur Miller, nine days before Tony nominations are to be decided -- stunned Broadway, not only because they could not recall a precedent, but because Mr. Stewart publicly took on the powerful and legendarily tough-minded Shuberts, as the organization is commonly known.The actor, who agreed to take a lower salary than usual for ''Mount Morgan'' in exchange for a percentage of the show's profits, had until then had a close relationship with Mr. Schoenfeld, having worked with him on ''A Christmas Carol'' and ''The Tempest,'' both of which were produced in Shubert theaters.''Mount Morgan,'' which received positive reviews, has been running at nearly full capacity, according to Variety, but most of the tickets have been heavily discounted, selling for about $40, down from the top ticket price of $80. As a result the play has been taking in 61 percent of its optimum gross. The producers would not say how much revenue the show needed to take in to make money.In an interview on Monday Mr. Stewart said that Mr. Schoenfeld had rejected requests to meet with him and Mr. Miller and that Mr. Stewart's agent, Sam Cohn, relayed a message from Mr. Schoenfeld demanding a written apology. ''Of course I have no reason to make an apology of any kind,'' Mr. Stewart said.He said he was driven to deliver his statement -- which he made standing alone onstage after the curtain call at Saturday's matinee and evening performances -- because he felt that the concerns he had voiced to Mr. Schoenfeld were being ignored. ''It's not as if I were trying to create a controversy around a failed production,'' Mr. Stewart said. ''The production is a success. The reviews are excellent. But people are not being told that.''Mr. Stewart said he believed that other nonmusicals like ''The Real Thing'' and ''A Moon for the Misbegotten'' were being advertised more aggressively. ''We are all in competition for audiences and for awards and nominations when they come around,'' he said.Mr. Stewart said he had received assurances from Mr. Schoenfeld last week over the telephone that an advertisement for the play would run the following Sunday in the Arts & Leisure section of The New York Times. The ad appeared in less than half of the copies -- 700,000 of 1.8 million, advertising personnel at The Times said, because it arrived at the Times after the deadline. He also said he had assurances that the exterior of the Ambassador Theater would be decorated with signs quoting the positive reviews, but that these never materialized.Mr. Schoenfeld said the signs would be forthcoming.Mr. Stewart said that before he made the speech, he alerted Mr. Miller; the play's director, David Esbjornson; Ms. Bush; and the rest of the cast. The actors declined through a secret ballot to join Mr. Stewart onstage.Although Mr. Stewart had initially vowed to continue making his speech, he said he changed his mind because of the wide attention his comments attracted.''It's a disturbing thing for an audience to experience that,'' Mr. Stewart said. ''And I was disturbed at having to do it.''
Bill East was always going to be a star. He had the drive. He had the smarts. He had the ingenuity to know which ideas to claim as his own and which to dump.Bill West was always going to be a star. He had the drive. He had the smarts. He had the ingenuity to know which ideas to claim as his own and which to dump.Bill East was always going to be a star. He had the drive. He had the smarts. He had the ingenuity to know which ideas to claim as his own and which to dump.Bill West was always going to be a star. He had the drive. He had the smarts. He had the ingenuity to know which ideas to claim as his own and which to dump.''Opportunity and responsibility,'' Bill East preached.''Embrace and extend,'' Bill West preached.Bill East was greatly underestimated by the old guard, George Bush and Bob Dole. He upended them and became, heaven help us, the poster boy for his generation, dominating the 90's. His rise was relentless, leaving a trail of enemies behind, using any means at his disposal to rule.Bill West was greatly underestimated by the old guard, the mainframers at I.B.M. He upended them and became, heaven help us, the poster boy for his generation, dominating the virtual 90's. His rise was relentless, leaving a trail of enemies behind, using any means at his disposal to rule.Bill East, who had an adolescent streak, knew he was being scrutinized for his reckless behavior but was too arrogant to pull back.Bill West, who had an adolescent streak, knew he was being scrutinized for his reckless behavior but was too arrogant to pull back.There was blood in the water.Jealous rivals lobbied for the downfall of Bill East, and ran to the prosecutor with tales of his nasty deeds.Jealous rivals lobbied for the downfall of Bill West, and ran to the prosecutor with tales of his nasty deeds.Bill East stonewalled and dissembled, giving them nothing and figuring it would blow over.Bill West stonewalled and dissembled, giving them nothing and figuring it would blow over.The chief executive from this Washington and his prosecutor came from different worlds. They started in mutual mistrust and worked themselves up to true loathing.The chief executive from the other Washington and his prosecutor came from different worlds. They started in mutual mistrust and worked themselves up to true loathing.The case built and Bill East was clearly in trouble. It would have helped if he could have shown some humility and remorse. But he was petulant and bitter.The case built and Bill West was clearly in trouble. It would have helped if he could have shown some humility and remorse. But he was petulant and bitter.The Bills spent millions of dollars and hours with high-priced lawyers.Some punishment was in order. But the prosecutors overreached, pushing for penalties that seemed radical and even bizarre.Despite the zealous pursuit within the Beltway -- or maybe because of it -- Bill East remains very popular.Despite the zealous pursuit within the Beltway -- or maybe because of it -- Bill West remains very popular.Had prosecution become persecution?Too hard on Bill East and, more important, too hard on us. He had gone over the line, certainly, but he was far from being the only politician who behaved like a cad. We are, after all, a nation obsessed with sex.Too hard on Bill West and, more important, too hard on us. He had gone over the line, certainly, but he was far from being the only capitalist who behaved like a bully. We are, after all, a nation obsessed with money.How quickly the two Bills went from dominant to dejected, kicking around their big Washington houses, screening movies, playing golf, wistful about their waning power. Their less charismatic No. 2's have stepped into the spotlight.Bill East is intent on repairing his image and plotting his next act. History will show, he insists, that his  nightmare with the Clinton Justice Department was all the doing of his enemies.Bill West is intent on repairing his image and plotting his next act. History will show, he insists, that his  nightmare with the Clinton Justice Department was all the doing of his enemies.There is even a wave of Bill nostalgia. When you look at the alternatives, these guys start to look pretty good. For better or worse, they're originals.
At 10 a.m. precisely, air-raid sirens sounded throughout Israel today and the country froze in its tracks for two minutes to remember the victims of the Holocaust. Drivers stood at attention beside their cars, shopkeepers stepped onto the sidewalk and pedestrians halted in mid-stride, their heads bowed or defiantly upright.But this did not happen in Mea Shearim or other strictly Orthodox neighborhoods. In Mea Shearim, as if the call of the siren was a car alarm, religious Jews in black frock coats and black felt hats did not pause, or interrupt conversations, or stop their shopping.At 10 a.m. precisely, air-raid sirens sounded throughout Israel today and the country froze in its tracks for two minutes to remember the victims of the Holocaust. Drivers stood at attention beside their cars, shopkeepers stepped onto the sidewalk and pedestrians halted in mid-stride, their heads bowed or defiantly upright.But this did not happen in Mea Shearim or other strictly Orthodox neighborhoods. In Mea Shearim, as if the call of the siren was a car alarm, religious Jews in black frock coats and black felt hats did not pause, or interrupt conversations, or stop their shopping.''Where does this thing of the siren come from?'' said Shai, a young Hasidic Jew with long strawberry-blond side curls, who would not give his last name. ''It's someone else's custom -- the English, the goyim,'' or non-Jews. ''What we as Jews do is recite religious texts. And not just today, but every day. To stand silent, like goyim, is to insult the name of those burned to death for their beliefs.''A woman shopper, dressed in a long skirt, her head covered with a tight scarf, agreed. ''God thinks it's a goyish holiday,'' she said of Holocaust Remembrance Day, which is a somber national holiday in Israel. Restaurants, theaters and nightclubs shut down, and schools and radio and television stations devote themselves to Holocaust education.''They have their customs,'' she said, nodding toward secular Israel in general. ''We have God.''For many Israelis the shunning of Holocaust Day by ultra-Orthodox Jews rubs extra salt in the wounds of a divided society. The haredim -- literally those who tremble before God -- also do not observe Israel's Independence Day or its Memorial Day. But many Israelis consider the Day of the Shoah, as it is known here, to be the one time when the Jews of Israel should stand -- literally -- together.''The haredim have set up parallel institutions for everything,'' said Efraim Zuroff, a Holocaust historian, a modern Orthodox Jew and the local director of the Simon Wiesenthal Center. ''But one would have hoped that the Holocaust would be the one exception. What did the Holocaust teach us, if not that Jewish unity was essential?''The matter is actually a complex internal Jewish dispute, not only about the way that the Holocaust should be remembered but about Holocaust history itself.In the haredi world, a string of new books, films and museum projects is sketching out an alternative to the official account of the Holocaust that is taught in Israeli schools and featured at Yad Vashem, the national Holocaust memorial.The mainstream account, by this reckoning, overemphasizes the physical heroism and martyrdom of nonreligious Jews who resisted the Nazis. It glorifies the fighters, they say, just as Zionists in Israel exalt the soldiers of the national army in which most haredim, who believe that they serve the country by keeping strictly observed Jewish traditions alive, do not serve.The date for Holocaust Remembrance Day, in fact, was fixed by Israel to commemorate the Warsaw ghetto uprising of 1943, in which the underground Jewish Combat Organization led Polish Jews in a four-week revolt against their deportation to Nazi concentration camps.''Why do we give more importance to the physical fighters?'' said Rabbi Menachem Mendel Taub, a Holocaust survivor who is known as the rebbe of Kaliv, the Hungarian city whose Hasidic Jewish community he and five generations of ancestors led. ''What about the rabbis and yeshiva students who clung to the religious commandments until the end? Did they not defend the soul of the Jewish people? Are they not as important to Israel today as F-16's and A-bombs?''More pointedly, Moshe Gorelick, in an article in a haredi weekly titled ''Even in Israel They Deny the Holocaust,'' said the official Holocaust Day explicitly disdained those who ''kept their godly souls until the last minute'' as ''going like lambs to the slaughter.''It is well known here that many haredim avoid Yad Vashem, which almost every other Israeli visits regularly as a schoolchild and a soldier. Most often they cite religious objections to the nude photographs of skeletal Holocaust victims. A deputy mayor of Jerusalem, an ultra-Orthodox Jew, created a stir several years ago when he threatened to cut off funds to Yad Vashem if the ''immodest'' pictures were not taken down.But ultra-Orthodox rabbis say the key complaint is ideological. The museum, they say, does not sufficiently pay tribute to religious martyrs, among them rabbis who had visas that would have allowed them to emigrate but stayed in Europe to lead -- and die with -- their followers.Rabbi Taub is one who is working to append the official history. He has published two volumes of a Holocaust encyclopedia filled with the stories of pious Jews who observed Jewish law against all odds in the ghettos and concentration camps.And he is raising money to build an alternative Holocaust museum in Jerusalem, for which the cornerstone has been laid. Another museum project, by a separate organization, is under way in Bnei Brak.After the Holocaust Remembrance ceremonies began on Monday night, the rabbi was interviewed in Bnei Brak, a religious community near Tel Aviv, through his personal secretary. The rabbi does not take questions from a woman; his secretary posed the questions. His assistants placed a large picture frame between the rabbi and this reporter so that his view would be blocked.He talked to the ceiling, alternating English from his 17 years in the United States with Hebrew and Yiddish. At the end he offered a blessing, both verbally and in the form of a small plastic pouch containing a 10-agorot coin, worth a few pennies.''When somebody is in jail for dozens of years, he promises to himself that when he is released he will do good things,'' the rabbi said. ''Usually his good intentions fade. I promised myself the day that I survived the Shoah that I would think about this day and night. What does a single day, Holocaust Day, mean?''To Holocaust survivors and to many of those taking part in the official ceremonies, it means a great deal. About 230,000 Israelis once lived under Nazi rule, according to Israeli statistics released today, and the population of survivors is dwindling. Some 20,000 have died since 1997.Prime Minister Ehud Barak and other government officials took part in an annual tradition today, reading, with breaking voices, the names of Jews killed in the Holocaust.In an editorial, a haredi newspaper, Hamodia, said ''God-fearing'' Jews still use ''these same names, in the same books, in the same customs, and in the same tradition that the opinion-makers in Israel would wish to put in a museum.'' Some religious Jews believe that they themselves are recreating the European Jewish village life that was wiped out during the Holocaust.Mr. Zuroff, author of a new book, ''The Response of Orthodox Jewry in the United States to the Holocaust'' (Yeshiva University Press), said he thought that the haredim had a hard time dealing with Holocaust history.The very fact of it is difficult for a person of deep faith, as were costly mistakes made by their leaders. Some Hasidic rabbis, for instance, ordered their followers to stay in Europe and not flee, which ultimately was devastating, he said. Then, while some top rabbis perished with their communities, others fled themselves.But ultra-Orthodox leaders disagree, and in the streets of Mea Shearim this morning, it came down to something more basic: Holocaust Day is a secular event, dictated by the secular authorities. And the haredim obey what they consider to be the higher authority of the Torah.Holocaust Day falls during the Hebrew month of Nissan, a month of celebration, when strictly Orthodox Jews are barred from public expressions of mourning. Modern Orthodox Jews believe that it is literal-minded to think that the ban should apply to Holocaust Day.But the strictly observant say that Judaism marks tragic events in the life of Jewish people on Tisha B'Av, a day of fasting and mourning that commemorates the destruction of the First Temple in 586 B.C. and the Second Temple in the year 70. Other Jews, they say, have allowed the Holocaust to dominate their worldview.''All Jewish history does not begin and end with the Holocaust,'' said Jonathan Rosenblum, a haredi spokesman.
The American political scene has always been enlivened by protests. But there are not many parallels to the recent rebellion among wealthy businesses tired of being hit up by Democrats and Republicans for campaign donations. As Don Van Natta Jr. reported in The Times this week, at least 31 corporations that have given big soft-money contributions in recent election cycles appear to be boycotting the process this year. Most are backing off quietly, but a few have stepped forward to say that swearing off soft money has not brought retaliation from the political establishment. Their disgust with the excesses of fund-raising could be another impetus to enactment of campaign finance reform this year.Late last year Trent Lott, the Senate majority leader, and other foes of the McCain-Feingold bill that would ban the unlimited donations to political parties known as soft money never tired of saying that this was an issue of little interest to American voters. Then the reform cause was energized by Senator John McCain's primary campaign, and by a Democratic race in which Vice President Al Gore declared that enactment of the soft-money ban would be one of his highest priorities as president.The American political scene has always been enlivened by protests. But there are not many parallels to the recent rebellion among wealthy businesses tired of being hit up by Democrats and Republicans for campaign donations. As Don Van Natta Jr. reported in The Times this week, at least 31 corporations that have given big soft-money contributions in recent election cycles appear to be boycotting the process this year. Most are backing off quietly, but a few have stepped forward to say that swearing off soft money has not brought retaliation from the political establishment. Their disgust with the excesses of fund-raising could be another impetus to enactment of campaign finance reform this year.Late last year Trent Lott, the Senate majority leader, and other foes of the McCain-Feingold bill that would ban the unlimited donations to political parties known as soft money never tired of saying that this was an issue of little interest to American voters. Then the reform cause was energized by Senator John McCain's primary campaign, and by a Democratic race in which Vice President Al Gore declared that enactment of the soft-money ban would be one of his highest priorities as president.Now business support for reform is growing. Senator Mitch McConnell has contended that businesses give money in order to ''participate'' in the political process, with no expectation of anything in return. But business leaders from the Committee for Economic Development and the Campaign for America, led by the investor Jerome Kohlberg, have characterized the campaign finance system as a shakedown operation. Many big businesses like General Motors, Time Warner and Allied Signal have concluded that the money they were spending on political contributions is better spent elsewhere.But of course many businesses and special interests still give to get something in return for their donations. Philip Morris and the National Rifle Association, two of the biggest givers to the Republicans, have gotten politicians to oppose efforts to regulate guns and tobacco. The question is whether the public wants big questions like a patients' bill of rights, the creation of Social Security investment accounts and policies on software, telecommunications and Internet companies to be decided by who can give the biggest donations to whom.Unfortunately, Gov. George W. Bush has so far joined Mr. Lott as an obstacle to reform. He says he favors a ban on corporation and union contributions to parties, but he would leave open a wide loophole by allowing unlimited donations to parties from individuals. Like other opponents of reform, he calls it a free speech issue. But Congress set limits on individual donations to candidates in 1974 after the Watergate scandals, and the legislation before Congress would simply extend those limits to donations to parties, which have been used to undermine the old reforms.Mr. McCain is to meet with the presumptive party nominee in a few days to talk about issues. He needs to press Mr. Bush to support his campaign finance legislation in the Senate, where it commands majority support, and Mr. Bush ought to sign on to real reform. Americans want it. Most in Congress want it. Now even the donors want it. Mr. Bush and Mr. Lott should not stand in their way.
Aides to Gov. George W. Bush fought back today against accusations that his fiscal proposals are risky, saying that the growth in the economy over the past six months meant that there would be enough money to accommodate comfortably the governor's spending and tax cut proposals.Mr. Bush's advisers released a new analysis of his budget plans after days in which Vice President Al Gore has sharply criticized Mr. Bush on fiscal issues. Mr. Gore has asserted that Mr. Bush's large tax cut proposal and plan to push for a portion of Social Security payroll taxes to be put into private investment accounts would return the nation to the era of deficits.Aides to Gov. George W. Bush fought back today against accusations that his fiscal proposals are risky, saying that the growth in the economy over the past six months meant that there would be enough money to accommodate comfortably the governor's spending and tax cut proposals.Mr. Bush's advisers released a new analysis of his budget plans after days in which Vice President Al Gore has sharply criticized Mr. Bush on fiscal issues. Mr. Gore has asserted that Mr. Bush's large tax cut proposal and plan to push for a portion of Social Security payroll taxes to be put into private investment accounts would return the nation to the era of deficits.Mr. Gore went on an advertising offensive on Monday against Mr. Bush, the presumptive Republican presidential nominee, through a series of interviews and television appearances, charging that Mr. Bush would continue ''multitrillion-dollar debts.'' Campaigning today, Mr. Gore called Mr. Bush's Social Security proposal ''bad for America's future and bad for America's economy.''The battle over numbers underscores how much the presidential campaign -- the first one waged in the new era of federal surpluses -- will be fought over economic policy and the related question of how to shore up Social Security. The Gore campaign considers the economic prosperity of the Clinton years one of its greatest assets.The figures released by Bush aides today addressed a weakness in earlier calculations. With the annual spending battle stepping up on Capitol Hill, the Bush campaign stopped assuming Congress would make large reductions in domestic spending, instead assuming discretionary domestic spending would grow.At the same time, Mr. Bush's advisers argued that the growth in the economy over the past six months means the federal surplus will be larger than previously forecast. They said that under their new calculations the estimated federal surplus across 10 years -- after $2.2 trillion is set aside for Social Security -- will amount to $1.8 trillion.That is roughly $1 trillion more than the Gore campaign estimates and about $500 billion more than the Bush campaign's earlier projections. Mr. Gore assumes a higher rate of spending and a less robust economy.Mr. Bush's aides said his cut would use 1.3 trillion surplus dollars, allowing $512 billion for other programs.''The bottom line is clear,'' said Lawrence B. Lindsey, the Bush campaign's chief economic adviser. ''Governor Bush's plan takes care of Social Security first, provides America's working families with a tax break and does it all within the context of a balanced budget.''The Bush campaign's new calculations were released less than 24 hours after Mr. Gore's aides held their own session with reporters and released an array of numbers they said showed that to accommodate his tax cut, Mr. Bush either had to make ''cuts in core areas of government that are unimaginable'' or risk a return to deficits.Mr. Gore's aides were still critical of Mr. Bush today.''Last month he claimed that his tax cut and spending increases were paid for,'' said Elaine Kamarck, policy adviser to Mr. Gore. ''Today, after finding more money, Bush still can't pay for his promises for a huge tax cut, increased spending and privatization of Social Security.''The Gore campaign said Mr. Bush was underestimating spending, and Mr. Bush's advisers refused to disclose how much Mr. Bush's embrace of a national missile defense system and prescription drug program would cost, while saying the proposals fit in their spending plan.The most serious dispute between the two campaigns is the true cost of Mr. Bush's tax-cut proposal. Mr. Bush's aides said the tax cut would cost $1.3 trillion over 10 years from 2001-2010. Over just five years they said it would cost $460 billion, slightly less than their original estimate of $483 billion. And they pointed to an analysis from the Congressional Joint Committee on Taxation backing them. The committee is controlled by Republicans.The Gore campaign argued that it was more appropriate to examine the tax cut through 2011, since the tax cut does not go into effect until fiscal 2002. Mr. Gore's aides said that once that extra year is added in, as well as lost interest costs, the tax cut costs $2 trillion.Another looming battle is over debt reduction and Social Security. Mr. Gore has made eliminating the public debt the centerpiece of his economic agenda. He says that Mr. Bush's proposal for putting some Social Security money into individual retirement accounts will carry a huge cost because it will require using part of the federal surplus that would otherwise go toward eliminating the national debt.Mr. Bush's aides counter that by giving individual workers their own retirement accounts, which can be invested in financial markets, they decrease the government's long-term obligation to pay benefits out of tax revenues. This itself, they say, is a form of debt reduction.The retirement system is projected to start paying out more in benefits than it is taking in through payroll taxes starting in 2015.THE 2000 CAMPAIGN: THE MONEY ISSUES
Jonah Jones, a jazz trumpeter who played with some of the great swing bands and sold a million copies of his versions of ''On the Street Where You Live'' and ''Baubles, Bangles and Beads,'' died on Sunday. He was 91 and lived in Manhattan.Mr. Jones, who was born in Louisville, Ky., learned to play the trumpet at a community center where he played church music. The day he heard a Louis Armstrong record, he said, his life changed. While still in Louisville, he performed with local bands like Tinsley's Royal Aces and Perdue's Pirates; in 1928 he was hired by the band leader Horace Henderson and worked in the Midwest for a few years.Jonah Jones, a jazz trumpeter who played with some of the great swing bands and sold a million copies of his versions of ''On the Street Where You Live'' and ''Baubles, Bangles and Beads,'' died on Sunday. He was 91 and lived in Manhattan.Mr. Jones, who was born in Louisville, Ky., learned to play the trumpet at a community center where he played church music. The day he heard a Louis Armstrong record, he said, his life changed. While still in Louisville, he performed with local bands like Tinsley's Royal Aces and Perdue's Pirates; in 1928 he was hired by the band leader Horace Henderson and worked in the Midwest for a few years.In 1932 he moved north and joined the violinist Stuff Smith's sextet. He continued changing jobs, appearing with McKinney's Cotton Pickers and Lil Armstrong, Louis Armstrong's wife, among other band leaders. But his first big break came in 1936, with a four-year residency at the Onyx Club secured by Stuff Smith. The band, featuring Smith on electrified violin, was popular, salting its vivid playing with slapstick humor.After working briefly with Benny Carter and Fletcher Henderson, Mr. Jones became a longtime member of Cab Calloway's group, from 1941 to 1952, seeing the band through its reduction from a big band to a septet to a quartet. (Calloway was an appreciative boss: he recorded a song celebrating Mr. Jones's arrival called ''Jonah Joins the Cab.'')He staged a midcareer resurgence in the 50's by putting a mute in his horn and familiar pop melodies in his hands. In 1952 Mr. Jones received an offer from the pianist Joe Bushkin to fill in at the Embers, one of New York's 52nd Street jazz clubs. Mr. Jones agreed to put a mute in his horn; this quieter sound was what his predecessor in the band, Buck Clayton, had adopted, and it was what the restaurant preferred. Mr. Jones, whose resume included stints with the society band leaders Lester Lanin and Meyer Davis, wasn't particularly fazed. Despite the fact that his regular style was open, forceful and swinging in the Louis Armstrong vein, he knew how to play softly too.He was invited back to play at the Embers with his own quartet in 1955, and the same restrictions of volume applied. Occasionally Mr. Jones was tempted to take the mute out of his horn. ''People would say, 'Jonah, just play one chorus open,' '' Mr. Jones told John S. Wilson of The New York Times in 1983. ''One night, Joe Howard, the maitre d', who had warned me to keep the mute in, was busy, and I thought he wasn't listening, so I played one chorus open. Afterward, when I came off the stand, Joe told me that if I took the mute out again I should just forget the address of the club.''The trumpeter Jimmy Owens recalled: ''The essence of his style was to swing. His whole thing was to communicate, and that's why he stuck with the melodies. He always said of himself that he was not a chord player, like Dizzy Gillespie and Roy Eldridge and Charlie Shavers; he was more of a melody player.''What started as a once-weekly job led to a week's engagement, which finally led to a five-year contract, in which Mr. Jones played at the club 20 weeks a year. He also began to sing during his performances of this period. The Embers became Mr. Jones's home base for the next decade, and he began to make records that further refined this sound, which verged on easy listening. His recordings of show tunes were extremely successful, and he won a Grammy in 1959 for the album ''I Dig Chicks.''.Touring and recording through the 80's, Mr. Jones finally retired from performing in 1993. His final public performance was at the Blue Note in Greenwich Village in November, when he sang during a benefit for the Jazz Foundation of America.He is survived by three children, Shirley Redmond of Manhattan, Lawrence Jones of the Bronx and William Jones of Cleveland; and two grandchildren.
The Rev. Floyd H. Flake, the Queens minister and former congressman who has been widely talked about as a potential candidate for mayor of New York City, plans to announce today that he is joining Edison Schools Inc., the largest for-profit school-management company  in the country, education industry officials said yesterday.Mr. Flake is to head the company's charter school division.The Rev. Floyd H. Flake, the Queens minister and former congressman who has been widely talked about as a potential candidate for mayor of New York City, plans to announce today that he is joining Edison Schools Inc., the largest for-profit school-management company  in the country, education industry officials said yesterday.Mr. Flake is to head the company's charter school division.Edison has been one of the most aggressive entrepreneurs in the mushrooming field of charter schools, publicly financed schools that operate free of much of the authority of local school districts.  Mr. Flake has been a supporter of the schools, as well as an advocate of giving parents vouchers to send their children to private schools.Mr. Flake, a Democrat who has been a leading black supporter of conservative causes, particularly in education, will continue to serve as senior pastor of the Allen A.M.E. Church in Jamaica, Queens, the officials said.H. Christopher Whittle, the founder and president of Edison, and Benno C. Schmidt Jr., the chairman, are expected to announce the appointment of Mr. Flake this morning at a news conference at Edison's headquarters in Manhattan. Neither Mr. Flake nor Edison officials would  comment yesterday.The appointment is expected to remove Mr. Flake from the list of potential candidates for the mayoral election in November 2001. Though he is a Democrat, Mr. Flake had been courted as a mayoral candidate by state Republican leaders, who saw him as someone who could attract African-American voters to the party through his support of education reform. And he has long been familiar to Republican leaders, having endorsed Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani, Gov. George E. Pataki and former Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato in their campaigns for public office. Mr. Flake had told friends, however, that if he ran it would be as a Democrat.Although Mr. Flake endorsed Al Gore for the Democratic presidential nomination in February, he has criticized the vice president's education policy, which opposes vouchers. Last October, Mr. Flake gave a warm introduction to George W. Bush, whom he referred to as ''my homeboy,'' at a meeting of the Manhattan Institute for Policy Research, a conservative advocacy group, at which Governor Bush outlined his education proposals.One education industry executive who spoke on condition of anonymity said Mr. Flake's job with Edison would not be merely a ceremonial one. Although both Mr. Whittle and Mr. Schmidt are familiar figures in both business and political circles, Mr. Flake is expected to become the company's most prominent public figure, promoting Edison's management program and curriculum to school board officials and talking about the benefits of charter schools to state and federal lawmakers.Edison operates 79 public schools with a total enrollment of 38,000 students in 16 states and 36 cities. Most are schools for which Edison has been given a management contract by a school district concerned about  a history of poor student performance. But about one-third of those are charter schools, in which Edison is accountable to a community sponsor chosen to start a school free of standard district rules.In November, Edison announced its largest contract to date, with the Dallas Independent School District, to serve 6,500 students next school year. Edison is scheduled to open its first charter school in New York State this fall, in Rochester.Edison is one of the largest publicly traded education companies, and its revenues have been growing quickly. They totaled $132 million in the fiscal year that ended June 30, 1999, up from $69 million the previous year. In the six months that ended Dec. 31, revenues grew to $102 million from $60 million in the same period a year earlier. But profits have been harder to come by; the company recorded net losses of $51 million last year and $21 million in the first six months of the current fiscal year.Mr. Flake's extensive contacts on both ends of the political spectrum testify to his philosophy of using his political power with both parties to gain economic clout for his church. The Allen African Methodist Episcopal Church, which says it has 12,000 members, is one of the largest churches in New York State, occupying a cavernous $23 million cathedral, which opened in 1997, on Merrick Boulevard in southeastern Queens.Although he runs only a small religious school, with 500 students from prekindergarten through 8th grade, Mr. Flake has vast business experience through Allen A.M.E.'s wide-ranging interests. The church has more than a dozen affiliated corporations, some of them operated for profit, with interests in housing, transportation and financial services.In 1997, Mr. Flake retired from Congress after 11 years, saying he wanted to spend more time tending his congregation. He has since been active in political circles as well as in education, and already has an association with Edison as well as some of its rival charter school companies.In March, he was appointed to an Edison advisory board. He also serves on a similar board for Victory Schools Inc., a small for-profit operator of charter schools in New York City. Mr. Flake is a director of the Children's Scholarship Fund, the philanthropic venture started by Ted Forstmann, the financier.Mr. Flake had recently considered starting his own charter school company to apply for the right to open new publicly financed schools in New York. As part of those deliberations, industry executives said, Mr. Flake was approached by Mr. Whittle about working for Edison.George Arzt, a Democratic political consultant and friend of Mr. Flake's, said that although many people in both major parties had asked Mr. Flake to explore a mayoral candidacy, he always said that if he ran it would be as a Democrat.''But he found at the end of an exploration period, after some time thinking about it, that he just didn't want to do it,'' Mr. Arzt said.
It was not the spectacular golf course on a cove overlooking the Pacific Ocean that led Gov. Tom Ridge of Pennsylvania to fly here the other day to address a group of Republicans (though he did squeeze in a round before his speech). It was the chance to do something a politician rarely does: praise another politician more than himself. The object of his affection was Gov. George W. Bush.Bill Richardson, the secretary of energy, cut short a visit to India for meetings on nuclear proliferation last October so he could be in New Hampshire to toss questions at Vice President Al Gore in preparation for his first debate with Bill Bradley. After only 28 hours in India, Mr. Richardson rushed to London and then flew to Boston, where a waiting Gore aide frantically drove him to Hanover, N.H., just in time to catch the vice president in the parking lot.It was not the spectacular golf course on a cove overlooking the Pacific Ocean that led Gov. Tom Ridge of Pennsylvania to fly here the other day to address a group of Republicans (though he did squeeze in a round before his speech). It was the chance to do something a politician rarely does: praise another politician more than himself. The object of his affection was Gov. George W. Bush.Bill Richardson, the secretary of energy, cut short a visit to India for meetings on nuclear proliferation last October so he could be in New Hampshire to toss questions at Vice President Al Gore in preparation for his first debate with Bill Bradley. After only 28 hours in India, Mr. Richardson rushed to London and then flew to Boston, where a waiting Gore aide frantically drove him to Hanover, N.H., just in time to catch the vice president in the parking lot.In the shadow of the presidential jockeying, a second competition is well under way: for the spot as No. 2. Dozens of governors, senators, House members, Cabinet secretaries, business executives, retired politicians and maybe even a general are maneuvering behind the scenes to land on the candidates' purported (and perhaps mythical) short lists.They are also seeking to score points with Mr. Bush and Mr. Gore by stumping for them around the country, dispensing unsolicited political and policy tips and seizing every opportunity to say flattering things about their party's standard bearer. Mindful that they not appear unseemly, the one thing they dare not do is utter two words directly to the candidate: running mate.In fact, for many, the watchwords are deftness and subtlety. If you are caught looking as if you are actually campaigning, you may lose.Jack Kemp, the Republican vice presidential candidate in 1996 who did not lobby for the job, and, if anything, discouraged Bob Dole from picking him, cautioned those who want to be considered: ''Keep your mouth shut, your head down,  and don't act like you want it.''Heeding such advice, several politicians are keeping their mouths shut, at least publicly. But many certainly act as if they want the job. One big-name politician in Washington who is frequently mentioned as a possible vice presidential contender was eager in an interview to make the case for why he would be a fabulous choice. But he insisted that his name not be used.''I don't want to be quoted,'' he said conspiratorially. ''That would be a good way to get off the list.'' Boasting about his selling points, he said of the candidate, ''I won't say that I'm one of his good buddies, but I know him as well as anybody outside his close friends.''Another politician, a senator from a battleground state, was happy to offer reasons why the politician quoted in the previous paragraph would not be such a fabulous choice.''I don't think he brings anything to the campaign,'' the senator said. Then he offered himself as a possibility, saying, ''I'm a tough campaigner.'' Excusing himself for speaking anonymously, he said, ''It's important not to look too anxious.''The Gore and Bush camps have only begun their painstaking hunts to find just the right running mate, and to resolve perhaps the one lingering mystery in the presidential sweepstakes before the national conventions in late summer.In recent days, Tony Coelho, Mr. Gore's campaign chairman, has been making the rounds, informing some politicians -- even some that others on the campaign said they did not consider hot prospects -- that they were in contention.''I talked to Coelho,'' said one politician. ''He told me I would be considered. I said, 'Thanks.' ''Mr. Coelho declined to discuss such conversations, and, in an interview, would not even confirm that they were taking place. But he chuckled at the attention he was getting from politicians who were quietly trying to win him over.Asked if people were undermining their chances by being too overt, he said: ''I don't think it hurts one way or another. It identifies personalities,  and that's fine.''Warren Christopher, the former secretary of state, is running the vice presidential screening process for Mr. Gore. The vice president turned to him because Mr. Christopher had the same job in 1992, when he helped Bill Clinton settle on Senator Gore.Mr. Bush has picked Dick Cheney, a former defense secretary and White House chief of staff who served under his father, to conduct his search.Officials in both campaigns said they will be looking for contenders who could plausibly -- and admirably -- serve as president, but who also would complement the strengths or weaknesses of the nominee and add some zip to the ticket. Despite the coming months of speculation about who is on which list, the campaign officials said the decisions will not likely be made until just before the national conventions.Since the Republican convention is first, Mr. Gore's choice may be in direct reaction to Mr. Bush's. For example, Gore advisers said that if Mr. Bush picks a woman, they might feel pressure to do the same.But Mr. Coelho said that because he and Mr. Gore know most of the contenders pretty well, one of Mr. Christopher's most important duties is to oversee background checks.''The vetting process becomes important -- that will eliminate some people,'' Mr. Coelho said. ''That's what Warren does.''Even if they do not get picked, politicians say it burnishes their image just to be mentioned.Representative Robert Menendez, Democrat of New Jersey, said a few of his friends in Congress and in labor unions asked if they could float his name. ''I didn't dissuade them,'' he said. ''It's an honor.'' Asked if an appearance on Geraldo Rivera's show was useful in getting his name mentioned, he said, ''Absolutely.'' At the very least, Mr. Menendez said, he would get the opportunity to press a favorite cause: ''Why Hispanic-Americans should be voting Democratic in this election.''Some possible contenders are being pushed into the limelight by people far removed from the selection process. Representative David E. Bonior of Michigan, the House Democratic whip, said he publicly suggested Mr. Menendez and Mr. Richardson because ''they are both really qualified and fine people and deserve to be very seriously considered.''But Mr. Bonior also acknowledged that he thought it was important, at the very least, for House members to get some attention. ''We want our leaders considered for different positions,'' he said.Several contenders said their model of what not to do was Gov. John Engler of Michigan, who was viewed by many Republicans as an unabashed self-promoter for the job four years ago, with constant visits to Washington. Even so, while Mr. Engler did not get picked, one strategist for Mr. Dole at the time said the nominee was flattered by the attention.Many Democrats say that Senator John Kerry of Massachusetts has been one of the most obvious practitioners of the subtle-but-aggressive approach. He traveled to early primary states to campaign for Mr. Gore and, the Gore campaign has noticed, has delivered speeches on national policy that helped raise his profile.On the Republican side, advisers to Elizabeth Dole made no secret of her desire to help Mr. Bush -- and get her name out. After ending her own bid for the Republican nomination, she frequently stumped for Mr. Bush in early primary states. And she has the added benefit that her husband, Bob Dole, trumpets her availability while she plays coy.But Mr. Ridge is cited by many Republicans for most adroitly positioning himself. ''He has the keenest political eye to what you may have to do to be considered,'' said Chris Hennick, a former executive director of the Republican Governors Association.Mr. Ridge is an obvious contender because he comes from a battleground state, has a compelling biography as a Vietnam veteran and is versed in national issues from his days in Congress. Most of all, he gets along well with Mr. Bush. To many Republicans, his biggest drawback is that he favors abortion rights, but that position could help Mr. Bush appeal to independents and other swing voters.The Pennsylvania governor helped himself by successfully pushing for the Republican National Convention to be held in Philadelphia. So he has a legitimate explanation for traveling the country meeting with Republicans.In his appearance here before the Lincoln Club of Northern California, a group of moderate Republicans, Mr. Ridge, brimming with praise for Mr. Bush, spoke of the governor's ''candor, his mischievous humor, his directness, his decision-making ability.''Mr. Ridge said the governor's ''compassionate conservative message makes a lot of sense.'' He defended Mr. Bush's controversial proposal to cut taxes by nearly half a trillion dollars, saying, ''I don't think Governor Bush should abandon his plan to cut taxes.''After the event, Mr. Ridge insisted in an interview that he had been careful not to campaign to be picked as Mr. Bush's running mate. ''I don't think it's his style,'' Mr. Ridge said of Mr. Bush. ''I don't think it's appropriate. It's certainly not my style.''Even so, Mr. Ridge's behavior has seemed strikingly similar to that of another Republican who was sleeping down the hall from Mr. Ridge at the lodge in Pebble Beach: Dan Quayle. But he was here to play golf, not politics.Consider this passage from Mr. Quayle's book: ''The vice presidency isn't an office you can campaign for,'' he said. ''But I had tried, as subtlety as I could, to make clear I was both qualified and available.''Did Mr. Ridge knock on the former vice president's door for advice? He laughed and said he did not even know Mr. Quayle was staying here.THE 2000 CAMPAIGN: THE SECOND SPOT
After a barrage of fiery talk critical of the Justice Department's raid to retrieve Elian Gonzalez, Senate and House Republicans are distancing themselves from the case, no longer sure that hearings are warranted.Descriptions of ''jack-booted thugs'' and ''storm troopers'' have been all but muted in the last few days, replaced by a cautious call for answers, maybe even just written ones, from the Justice Department about its decision to send heavily armed agents into a private home.After a barrage of fiery talk critical of the Justice Department's raid to retrieve Elian Gonzalez, Senate and House Republicans are distancing themselves from the case, no longer sure that hearings are warranted.Descriptions of ''jack-booted thugs'' and ''storm troopers'' have been all but muted in the last few days, replaced by a cautious call for answers, maybe even just written ones, from the Justice Department about its decision to send heavily armed agents into a private home.While several prominent Republicans, including Senator Trent Lott, the majority leader, still want to delve publicly into the Elian case, many others have come to believe that doing so could be a grand political miscalculation.Those Republicans, ranging from conservative to moderate, have helped tone down the rhetoric surrounding the Justice Department's raid on the Miami house of Elian's great-uncle Lazaro Gonzalez.In part, members of Congress are heeding public opinion surveys showing that most Americans agree with Attorney General Janet Reno's decision to raid the house; disagree with the boy's Miami relatives who seek to prevent his return to Cuba; and scorn Congress's desire to dredge up the details of the raid once again. The members also recognize the political danger of hearings, which tend to become overly partisan and often paint Republicans as overzealous.''It could be turned into political theater, and I don't think anyone wants that,'' said Senator Don Nickles of Oklahoma, the second-ranking Republican in the Senate. ''I'd like to get some answers to some questions, but I don't think we need a big show.''Senator Olympia Snowe, Republican of Maine, echoed several colleagues' comments when she said she worried that hearings would be viewed as just more posturing on a case that many feel has already been overpoliticized.''It would look like a lot of political grandstanding, and I would be concerned about that,'' Ms. Snowe said. ''This could be done without hearings.''In his weekly news conference, Representative Dick Armey of Texas, the majority leader, seemed to search for the mildest characterizations he could find to discuss the case. After calling the photograph of a federal agent with a submachine gun removing Elian from a closet in the Miami house ''frightening,'' Mr. Armey said members needed ''to sit down and talk about'' hearings.''I don't know the answer to whether or not a hearing will be necessary,'' he said.Even Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani of New York, who had referred to the agents who seized Elian as storm troopers, has lowered the volume as he considers a Senate run. At a speech in Saratoga Springs, N.Y., on Friday, he did not call the raid ''unconscionable,'' as he previously had; nor did he lay blame for the raid, as he did earlier last week, on ''Fidel Castro, Bill Clinton and Janet Reno.''John Kingdon, professor emeritus of political science at the University of Michigan, said Republicans might have initially misread the Elian case, especially the level of outrage about the raid and the photograph of the agent with the gun. In addition, he said, they appeared to underestimate the power of another set of photographs, those of a beaming father and son.Their calculations also shifted after Ms. Reno and her deputies appeared on television numerous times to defend their actions. While Republicans say legitimate questions remain, the Justice Department has tried to address concerns about cost and the search warrant. And Ms. Reno has spoken of the events leading up to the raid.''They have really miscalculated the political benefits,'' Mr. Kingdon said of the Republicans.At this point, Senate hearings would most likely last one or two days and focus on whether the raid was legal and proper, Senator Lott said. The House has said it will begin a ''preliminary inquiry.''The Republican retreat began last week when Senator Orrin G. Hatch of Utah, chairman of the Judiciary Committee, who had called a hearing for this Wednesday, postponed it because the Justice Department failed to produce the information he sought. On Sunday, Mr. Hatch suggested that his committee might not hold hearings if the documents adequately explain the department's decision.Today, Mr. Hatch said he still awaited the documents. He also criticized Ms. Reno for making television appearances while pleading for more time to collect the documents.From the start of the case in November -- when Elian was rescued in the Atlantic Ocean after a boat carrying fleeing Cubans sank, claiming the life of his mother -- many Republicans were quick to side with Cuban-Americans in Miami who fought to keep the boy in the United States, even if it meant separating him from his father in Cuba.Top Republicans leaders, including presidential candidates, unleashed sharp attacks on Fidel Castro and argued that the boy's case should be heard in a state family court, even though it has no jurisdiction over an immigration case.Vice President Al Gore, treading carefully, broke with the Clinton administration and also suggested that the case was best left to the courts.In January, with Congress just back from its recess, Republicans pushed for a bill to make Elian a citizen. But in another retreat, Republican leaders dropped the effort, without saying so outright, after it became clear they lacked the votes in their own party to push the bill.A number of Republicans viewed the case as a family issue -- a son kept from his father -- and found it difficult to support any measure that suggested that the two should not be reunited. They were not the most vocal, but their influence was considerable.At stake is a crucial group of Cuban-American voters, which leans Republican but helped deliver Florida to President Clinton in 1996. Some analysts say Republicans were just trying to help George W. Bush, the presumptive Republican presidential nominee, win Florida.''Some would suggest that if Gore can deny Bush Florida, Gore would be hard to beat,'' said Brian Kennedy, a Republican political consultant. ''Republicans want to remind people that it was the Clinton administration that came in and pointed guns to take this boy back.''--------------------New Police Chief in MiamiMIAMI, May 2 (AP) -- A Cuban immigrant, Raul Martinez, was sworn in today as Miami's first Hispanic police chief, filling a position left vacant by political turmoil after the raid.Mr. Martinez, 50, replaces William O'Brien, who resigned after Mayor Joe Carollo fired the city manager, Donald Warshaw.
INTERNATIONALA3-12Clinton Presses Congress On China Trade Issue  President Clinton and top aides, acknowledging that they lack the votes to pass a China trade measure, asserted that the issue was as much about global leadership and the fate of Chinese reformers as about American business interests.A1INTERNATIONALA3-12Clinton Presses Congress On China Trade Issue  President Clinton and top aides, acknowledging that they lack the votes to pass a China trade measure, asserted that the issue was as much about global leadership and the fate of Chinese reformers as about American business interests.A1Debate Over the Holocaust  Many Israelis observed the Day of the Shoah to remember the victims of the Holocaust, but many others in strictly Orthodox neighborhoods ignored the occasion, reflecting a complex dispute over not only how the Holocaust should be remembered but about Holocaust history itself.A4Warning on Germ Warfare  The General Accounting Office says there is no guarantee that some of the money sought by the Clinton administration for Russian-American biological projects will not be used by the Russians to research or develop germ weapons.A7Hostage Deaths Reported  Two foreign hostages held by Muslim rebels in the southern Philippines died during a clash between the rebels and government troops, a rebel leader said.A5World BriefingA10SCIENCE/HEALTHConditions for Tidal Waves  Scientists said they had found cracks in the seabed off Virginia and North Carolina that could set off a tsunami that might send waves as high as 20 feet speeding toward the Middle Atlantic states.A22ARTSE1-12Speech Draws Producers' Ire  The producers of ''The Ride Down Mount Morgan'' have filed a union complaint of unprofessional conduct against their star, Patrick Stewart, citing a speech he made from the stage accusing them of failing to promote the play adequately.E1China Buys Back 3 Treasures  A state-owned corporation, which until last year was owned by the army and is best known for global weapons sales, paid $4 million for three Chinese relics at auctions in Hong Kong that Beijing had challenged.E1OBITUARIESB10Penelope Fitzgerald  The author of the 1995 novel ''The Blue Flower,'' about the German poet Novalis and his hapless love for a 12-year-old girl, was 83.B10Jonah Jones  A jazz trumpeter who played with some of the great swing bands and sold a million copies of his versions of ''On the Street Where You Live'' and ''Baubles, Bangles and Beads,'' he was 91.B10NATIONALA16-25G.O.P. Plan to Alter Schedule of Primary Voting  A high-level Republican committee proposed a new presidential nominating system intended to build suspense and interest from March through June, with smaller states voting first and larger states casting the decisive final votes. The Republican national chairman said he expected the party to adopt the plan.A1Gore Anticrime Proposal  Vice President Al Gore called for a broad array of anticrime measures, among them mandatory drug testing of all prisoners and parolees. His proposal would have the government spend $500 million a year to help states test, treat and counsel prisoners and parolees for drug use.A24Bush Aides Fight Back  Aides to Gov. George W. Bush disputed accusations by Vice President Al Gore that Mr. Bush's fiscal proposals were risky. They said economic growth in the last six months meant that there would be enough money to easily accommodate the governor's spending and tax cut proposals.A25White House Yields Documents  The White House turned over seven documents sought by the House Government Reform Committee, abandoning its intention to invoke executive privilege in a dispute over a Congressional request for some documents related to missing White House e-mail messages.A22Clinton Inquiry Was Sought  Senator Arlen Specter said the former head of the Justice Department's campaign finance unit had urged appointment of an independent counsel to investigate President Clinton and a top Loral aerospace executive. A separate Justice Department inquiry looked into whether the company broke the law by providing important technological help to China's rocket program.A22New Policy on Altered Food  The Clinton administration is expected to announce today a strengthening of its policy on regulating the safety of genetically engineered foods.A20Medicare Proposals Opposed  The Justice Department said Congressional proposals to create an independent agency to run Medicare or administer prescription drug benefits for the elderly were unwise and probably unconstitutional.A18Publisher Is Replaced  Hearst replaced Timothy White as publisher of The San Francisco Examiner, a day after he testified that he had offered Mayor Willie Brown favorable editorials in exchange for his support of Hearst's purchase of The San Francisco Chronicle.A20Report on Bonfire Accident  A commission investigating the collapse of a Texas A&M University bonfire tower concluded that students made fundamental mistakes in building the structure and that university officials failed to control the project properly. The accident killed 11 students and a former student.A16Arkansas Executes Woman  Christina Marie Riggs, 28, was put to death by lethal injection for killing her two children, ages 5 and 2.A22NEW YORK/REGIONB1-8Panel Clears Pataki in Trips Linked to Corporations  The State Ethics Commission found that Governor Pataki and his aides did not violate the law in letting a nonprofit trade group largely financed by companies lobbying his office pay for trips to Hungary.A1Mr. Pataki refused to rule out running for the Senate if Mayor Giuliani's health forced him out.B6Deal on State's Borrowing  Governor Pataki and legislative leaders announced an agreement to limit the state's much-maligned borrowing practices, clearing the way for final passage of the budget.B1Democrats Regain Nassau  Craig M. Johnson won a special election to fill the seat in the County Legislature that was held by his mother, Barbara, whose death in March cost the Democrats their first majority in 80 years.B1A Suicidal Car Crash  Michael Dombrowski and Jeffrey Barton, eighth graders in East Haddam, Conn., killed themselves in a car crash on Monday in what appeared to be a suicide pact linked to the death of the brother of one of the boys in a crash at the same spot six months ago, the police said.B1EDUCATIONB11Schools Company Gains Recruit  The Rev. Floyd H. Flake, a former congressman from Queens considered a potential candidate for mayor, is expected to announce today that he will head the charter school division of Edison Schools, which manages public schools for profit.B3DININGF1-14SPORTSD1-8Racing Honors Julie Krone  The retired jockey, who rode to victory 3,545 times during 19 seasons, became the first woman to be elected to racing's Hall of Fame.D1Marathoner Gains Citizenship  Khalid Khannouchi, the Moroccan-born runner who holds the world marathon record, became a United States citizen, but it was unclear whether he would compete in the Olympics this summer. He will hold a news conference today.D5BUSINESS DAYC1-28ABC Returns to Cable  Time Warner put ABC television programs back on its cable systems after agreeing to a truce in its dispute with ABC's parent, Walt Disney. The action came as the F.C.C. was set to order Time Warner to restore the ABC signal until after the ratings sweeps period ended, on May 24.A1Unilever Seeks Bestfoods  Unilever made an unsolicited $18.4 billion bid to acquire Bestfoods, which rejected the offer.C1AT&T Stock Drops 14%  AT&T's quarterly results met analysts' expectations, but the company's warning that earnings and revenue growth for the full year would be lower than anticipated sent shares tumbling $6.8125, to $41.9375.C1The Nasdaq fell 4.4 percent, and the Dow and S.& P. 500 declined, too.C14Band Enters Online Music Fight  The heavy-metal band Metallica today will seek to prevent 335,000 fans from using Napster, a service for sharing music collections over the Internet. A lawyer for the band said users were making Metallica recordings available for others to copy.C1Car Buyers Undeterred  Every big domestic and foreign automaker said sales last month exceeded even last year's brisk pace, despite rising interest rates, stock volatility and higher gas prices.C2Business DigestC1EDITORIALA26-27Editorials: Revolt of the business class; a needless showdown over Vieques; fire standards for cigarettes; the changing face of terror.  Columns: Paul Krugman, Maureen Dowd.CrosswordE4  TV ListingsE11  Public LivesB2  WeatherD8
A high-level Republican committee proposed a new presidential nominating system today intended to build suspense and interest from March through June, with smaller states voting first and larger states casting the decisive final votes.The proposal was a sharp reaction to the current system in which both party nominations were effectively decided by March 7, the first day with several major primaries, before millions of Americans knew much about the candidates.A high-level Republican committee proposed a new presidential nominating system today intended to build suspense and interest from March through June, with smaller states voting first and larger states casting the decisive final votes.The proposal was a sharp reaction to the current system in which both party nominations were effectively decided by March 7, the first day with several major primaries, before millions of Americans knew much about the candidates.Bill Brock, former Republican Party chairman, who led the committee that offered the plan, said, ''Too many people in too many states have no voice in the electoral process that names our candidates.''Jim Nicholson, the Republican national chairman, said he expected the party to adopt the plan.The Republican willingness to scrap the system seems likely to open up a national debate, even though the Democratic Party's reaction was to point out that the present system had elected Bill Clinton twice and therefore ''at this point, there is little incentive to change.''But if Republicans adopt the plan at the convention in August, Democrats might be willing to discuss changing the primary process. A crucial provision would give the Republican National Committee the authority, which it now lacks and the Democratic National Committee has, to alter delegate selection rules between conventions.James Roosevelt, co-chairman of the Democratic Rules and By-Laws Committee, said, ''If the Republicans can get that kind of flexibility, then between cycles we could have some real substantive discussions about this.''Potential opposition from large states is a major obstacle to the Brock plan. So is traditional Republican reluctance to impose national rules on state parties. Democratic opposition, if it persists, would be another hurdle, and even if both parties agreed on a plan, getting almost every state to change its primary or caucus date would be difficult.Under the plan, the 12 least-populous states, the District of Columbia and the territories would be allowed to hold primaries or caucuses no earlier than the first Tuesday in March. Another group of 13 slightly more-populous states, from Connecticut to New Mexico, could go on the first Tuesday in April. Thirteen middle-size states, including Kentucky and Massachusetts, could go on the first Tuesday in May.The rest, including New York, New Jersey, California, Florida and Texas, could have primaries on the first Tuesday in June. Any state could go later, and in the early stages, some might do so to get a Tuesday that was less crowded. The plan makes no allowance for early votes in Iowa and New Hampshire, but that might be adjusted by the Republican National Committee.State legislatures would have to vote to adopt new primary dates. To pressure them, the Republican National Committee would have the power to deny state parties 50 percent to 90 percent of their delegates.That degree of central control may be an issue, at the convention if not earlier, at next week's meeting of the Republican rules committee.John Deardourff, a Republican consultant whose first primary was in 1964, said today, ''The unwillingness to impose Washington-based decisions and the unwillingness to accept them is pretty strongly ingrained in Republican theology, and whether it's the government doing it, or the party, it just doesn't sit well.''The first hurdle is clearly within the party.Bill Jones, the California secretary of state, said the plan was ''absolutely not'' in his state's best interest because it would mean that California always came in the last group. He said the majority of members on the Brock commission on which he served were mistaken in their belief that because nearly half the delegates would not be chosen before June, a contest would keep going.Mr. Jones, who had pushed to move the California primary up to March 7, said he did not think the suggested changes would be enough to overcome the current way of nominating a candidate, which he called ''raise a lot of money, get it over quick.'' He said he thought a system of regional primaries, in which different regions each got their chance to go first, would be better.Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, the presumptive Republican presidential nominee, could play a decisive role on the plan at the convention. But his campaign had no comment tonight, saying Mr. Bush looked forward to studying the report.The report was issued on the day when North Carolina and Indiana, the 11th and 14th most populous states, held presidential primaries that drew virtually no interest. Early in the campaign, primary turnout was high, at least among Republicans, but by March 7, known as Super Tuesday, two-fifths of Republican delegates and one-third of Democratic delegates had been picked.Curtis Gans, head of the Committee for the Study of the American Electorate, who cheered the Brock report as ''the best thing since sliced bread,'' said turnout since March 7 ''has been abysmally low, and the citizens in the states which were after Super Tuesday have felt left out of the process.''A study by the Joan Shorenstein Barone Center at Harvard, known as the Vanishing Voter project, found both interest in and knowledge of the candidates had declined in recent weeks.The Brock report said the plan that it recommended could ease ''many of the problems that have come to plague the current nominating process: front-loading, compression, low voter turnout, early media frenzy, excessive 'tarmac and media ad' campaigning.''If Republicans do adopt the plan, the process of getting legislatures to alter primary dates (and abolish winner-take-all contests), would be simplified if some agreement was reached with the Democrats. Republicans might not press ahead without such cooperation.Today Mr. Roosevelt complained that the Republican plan gave too prominent a place to ''states with no diversity.'' Mr. Brock acknowledged that blacks made up only 6.2 percent of the population in the first group of states. But he said the existing system, with pre-eminence to Iowa and New Hampshire, rewarded two even-less-diverse states, since Iowa is 2 percent black and New Hampshire is 0.7 percent black.In the 1970's, when Democrats were establishing new rules for choosing delegates, most legislatures went along. The bipartisan good feelings more typical in state capitals than Washington frequently persuaded Republicans to let the Democrats have the new procedures they needed to stay out of trouble with their national party. Democrats could well do the same for Republicans over the next couple of years.Prof. Thomas Patterson, a leading researcher in the  Vanishing Voter project at Harvard, said he doubted the plan would accomplish its goals. Mr. Patterson said he believed if one candidate won most of the primaries in the first two months, he would be acclaimed as the likely nominee, even if most delegates had not been selected.Mr. Brock did not argue that the plan, if in force this year, might have produced a different candidate. But he noted that a shortage of money had forced several Republicans out of the contest even before the first votes had been cast. He argued that a calendar that began with primaries in lightly populated, relatively inexpensive states would have let them continue longer and ''bring their ideas'' to the process.John Weaver, political director for Senator John McCain, said he had no idea how a different calendar would have affected Mr. McCain.''We've not been reflective about that,'' Mr. Weaver said. ''We were pleased with the calendar. Why look back?''On the Democratic side, the national committee's satisfaction with the existing system reflected the position of the campaign of Vice President Al Gore.Doug Berman, campaign manager for former Senator Bill Bradley, said that having both parties hold primaries at the same time would have helped Mr. Bradley, since interest in the Democratic race evaporated when only Republicans were voting in February.THE 2000 CAMPAIGN: THE PRIMARY SCHEDULE
In a speech pungent with tough talk about criminals, drug abusers and his Republican rival for president, Vice President Al Gore called today for a broad array of anticrime measures, among them mandatory drug testing of all prisoners and parolees.Choosing a Southern state as the backdrop for one of his most conservative speeches of the presidential campaign, Mr. Gore proposed federal spending of $500 million a year  to help states test, treat and counsel  prisoners and parolees for drug use.In a speech pungent with tough talk about criminals, drug abusers and his Republican rival for president, Vice President Al Gore called today for a broad array of anticrime measures, among them mandatory drug testing of all prisoners and parolees.Choosing a Southern state as the backdrop for one of his most conservative speeches of the presidential campaign, Mr. Gore proposed federal spending of $500 million a year  to help states test, treat and counsel  prisoners and parolees for drug use.Under the plan, inmates in state prisons -- mandatory drug testing already applies in federal prisons --  would not be released until they could pass drug tests. Further, parolees could be returned to prison if they failed the tests, which would be administered to them twice a week.  Parolees would also be subjected to stricter supervision, to ensure that they paid child support, stayed off drugs and found jobs.''When inmates are sent back to the streets unrehabilitated, unrepentant and unskilled, then they are just going to commit more crime and go right back into prison,'' Mr. Gore said to a crowd filled with uniformed police officers.As in all his recent policy speeches, the vice president used a harsh tone to attack Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, the apparent Republican presidential nominee, this time maintaining that he had cut state financing of drug treatment by half.As a result of such policies, Mr. Gore said, Texas under Mr. Bush has experienced a 25 percent increase in the number of former inmates returned to prison for new crimes within three years of release.Mr. Gore did not suggest that Mr. Bush had been soft on crime, a position that would be hard to defend: in Mr. Bush's five and a half years as governor, Texas has undertaken the nation's largest prison-building program, executed a record number of criminals, lengthened sentences for many crimes and incarcerated a rising number of juveniles.But the vice president did say: ''I believe that we should demand that criminals get clean before they get out of jail. Governor Bush seems content to keep pushing them out of the same revolving door.''Aides to Mr. Bush disputed Mr. Gore's statistic on Texas recidivism and his accusation that the governor had cut financing of drug treatment. They also said violent crime in the state had fallen 20 percent, to a 20-year low, during the Bush administration. And they asserted that the availability of drug treatment in federal prisons had declined during the Clinton-Gore administration, even as  drug use among adolescents had risen (an assertion disputed in turn by the Gore campaign).''If Al Gore is willing to attack Texas, where violent crime is at a 20-year low and the largest prison drug-treatment program in the country is located, we're also expecting attacks on Texans for defending the Alamo,'' said Dan Bartlett, a Bush aide.Just as Mr. Bush has tried to move further to the center of the political spectrum with education and health care proposals, Mr. Gore's crime speech today provided him an opportunity to reach out to centrist Republicans and conservative Democrats. And he seized it with gusto.He cited the Bible several times, illustrating the problem of violence among young men by retelling the story of Cain and Abel. He argued that no amount of anticrime legislation would work unless people took greater responsibility for their actions. And he castigated both conservative Republicans and liberal Democrats for failing to compromise on crime-fighting plans, casting himself as the purveyor of a third way who could rise above ''old orthodoxies.''''We can't go back to the finger-pointing and failed strategies that led to that steep increase in crime in the Bush-Quayle administration,'' he said. ''And we can't go back to the old Democratic approach, which was tough on the causes of crime but not tough enough on crime itself, again when people in both political parties wanted us to do more.''Mr. Gore's effort to outflank Governor Bush on crime recalls Bill Clinton's drive in the 1992 campaign to neutralize what had been a potent Republican issue by advocating tough anticrime measures, including the death penalty.The vice president's speech today, typifying the administration's approach to policy making, offered a mixture of ideas -- some new, some old, many small-bore. Several of the ideas were first discussed by Mr. Gore in a crime speech last July in Boston, where he called for longer sentences for all crimes committed with guns and for requiring photo-bearing licenses for people who buy new handguns.Today Mr. Gore restated his support for a proposal that federal money help local governments hire 50,000 new police officers in the coming decade. The Clinton administration has already helped finance the hiring of 60,000 new police officers, with 40,000 more in the pipeline.Mr. Gore also proposed aid to help state and local governments buy computers for crime-fighting purposes, hire new prosecutors and expand after-school programs.And in addition to mandatory drug testing of prisoners and parolees, he called for expanding drug treatment programs for noncriminals, though he offered no details. ''I believe we should build a country in which every single addict who finds the power to reach out and say, 'Now is the time I want help and I want treatment' gets an immediate response,'' he said.Mr. Gore also jumped into what has become a contentious debate in Congress by endorsing a constitutional amendment to expand the rights of crime victims. The amendment would grant victims and their families the right to reasonable notice of court proceedings involving their cases, the right to have a voice in those proceedings, and the right to notice of an offender's release or escape from prison.Opponents of the amendment, including many Democrats, assert that those rights can be ensured  without amending the Constitution. In addition, some liberals argue that the measure would violate the civil rights of the accused.In His Own Words  AL GORESpeaking yesterday about crime in Atlanta, as recorded by The New York Times:''I pledge to you that if I am entrusted with the presidency, I will launch a sweeping anticrime strategy to make our families safe and secure. I will intensify the battle against crime, drugs and disorder in our communities. . . .As crime and fear grew, too many families became afraid to live up to their own responsibilities and help take back their communities from the thugs and the dealers. And too many criminals saw the disorder on our streets as an invitation to further lawlessness and violence. . . .Seven years ago, we began to change all that. President Clinton and I thought we needed a tougher and more comprehensive strategy to fight crime on every single front. Smarter prevention to stop crime before it even started. More police on our streets to thicken the thin blue line between order and disorder. And tougher punishments, including the death penalty for those who dared to penalize the innocent.''THE 2000 CAMPAIGN: THE CRIME ISSUE
THE STATESDRUG COSTS ARE ISSUE IN MONTANA  Brian Schweitzer, a Democratic candidate for the Senate in Montana, has campaigned hard on the high price of prescription drugs and the burden it puts on the uninsured elderly. Mr. Schweitzer, who has taken retirees to Canada to highlight the lower cost of drugs there, has exchanged television fire with Citizens for Better Medicare, a lobbying coalition led by the drug industry. Now the Democratic Senatorial Campaign Committee, which believes Mr. Schweitzer has a good shot at winning one of six seats the party needs to retake control of the Senate, has produced a television spot urging voters to ''call the big drug companies and tell them to get out of the way of Brian Schweitzer's fair prices drug plan.'' Mr. Schweitzer, a farmer who has never held elective office, is trying to unseat the Republican incumbent, Conrad Burns.Robin Toner (NYT)THE STATESDRUG COSTS ARE ISSUE IN MONTANA  Brian Schweitzer, a Democratic candidate for the Senate in Montana, has campaigned hard on the high price of prescription drugs and the burden it puts on the uninsured elderly. Mr. Schweitzer, who has taken retirees to Canada to highlight the lower cost of drugs there, has exchanged television fire with Citizens for Better Medicare, a lobbying coalition led by the drug industry. Now the Democratic Senatorial Campaign Committee, which believes Mr. Schweitzer has a good shot at winning one of six seats the party needs to retake control of the Senate, has produced a television spot urging voters to ''call the big drug companies and tell them to get out of the way of Brian Schweitzer's fair prices drug plan.'' Mr. Schweitzer, a farmer who has never held elective office, is trying to unseat the Republican incumbent, Conrad Burns.Robin Toner (NYT)THE REPUBLICANSGOV. THOMPSON NAMED PLATFORM CHAIRMAN  Gov. Tommy G. Thompson of Wisconsin has been named chairman of the committee that will draft the Republican platform at the party's national convention this summer, an appointment that abortion rights advocates regard as a sign that George W. Bush, the presumed presidential nominee, will not ease the party's staunch anti-abortion position. Two years ago, Governor Thompson signed legislation outlawing the procedure that opponents call partial-birth abortion. Kate Michelman, president of the National Abortion Rights Action League, said the selection showed that Mr. Bush, despite his advocacy of inclusiveness, ''cares about what the far right of his party wants.'' Mr. Thompson said after his appointment on Monday that he looked forward to ''serving on the committee to articulate our party's most innovative ideas, the principles that bind us together and our vision for the future.''Irvin Molotsky (NYT)THE POLLSBUSH HOLDS NARROW LEAD  The latest USA Today/CNN/Gallup presidential preference poll gives Gov. George W. Bush a five-point lead over Vice President Al Gore, 49 percent to 44 percent. The poll also indicates that should Mr. Bush pick Senator John McCain of Arizona as his running mate, he would widen his lead. Among all voters, the poll found, 2 of 3 would not be more inclined to vote for Mr. Bush if Mr. McCain were added to the ticket. But among independents, 2 of 5 said they would be more inclined to vote for Mr. Bush with Mr. McCain on the ticket. The poll, which surveyed 1,003 likely voters from April 28 to 30, has a margin of sampling error of plus or minus five points. In a USA Today/CNN/Gallup poll taken three weeks earlier, Mr. Bush led Mr. Gore by nine points.B. Drummond Ayres Jr. (NYT)THE 2000 CAMPAIGN
There was heavy editing to the first lineup card posted by the Yankees' hitting coach, Chris Chambliss, tonight. It was covered with black blotches, the names and accompanying positions obliterated and then revised.Chuck Knoblauch was out with a sprained wrist, and the new leadoff hitter had a batting average of .170 -- but Ricky Ledee hit a home run, his first of the season. The new second baseman, Wilson Delgado, ripped a two-run double. The catcher, Chris Turner, played in his first game for the Yankees, hit an important double and guided Andy Pettitte through most of the 4-2 victory against Cleveland.There was heavy editing to the first lineup card posted by the Yankees' hitting coach, Chris Chambliss, tonight. It was covered with black blotches, the names and accompanying positions obliterated and then revised.Chuck Knoblauch was out with a sprained wrist, and the new leadoff hitter had a batting average of .170 -- but Ricky Ledee hit a home run, his first of the season. The new second baseman, Wilson Delgado, ripped a two-run double. The catcher, Chris Turner, played in his first game for the Yankees, hit an important double and guided Andy Pettitte through most of the 4-2 victory against Cleveland.It doesn't seem to matter who plays for the Yankees these days; Choo Choo Coleman and Marv Throneberry could wear Yankee pinstripes and be transformed. They are getting strong starting pitching and strong relief and scraping together enough offense, and their 17-8 record is the American League's best. The Yankees have won 23 of 32 regular-season games in Jacobs Field, this victory coming with a makeshift lineup.Knoblauch was scratched from the starting lineup because of his sprained left wrist, and unless he feels markedly better Friday, he will probably be placed on the 15-day disabled list. Delgado started at second base, in the 67th game of his major league career. He is not hard to miss when the Yankees take batting practice. Delgado is generously listed at 5 feet 11 inches and 165 pounds -- he is probably shorter and lighter -- and he tends to dump a lot of balls over the infield, rather than launching rockets over the fences. When asked about Delgado's offensive potential, Manager Joe Torre replied, ''Well, he's a good defensive player.''Delgado does not have the experience of the man he is essentially replacing, Luis Sojo. The Yankees don't have someone like Darryl Strawberry on their bench, the big left-handed slugger who frightens opposing managers; Lance Johnson hits singles and steals bases.Two years ago, Homer Bush came off the Yankee bench with his awesome speed and he stole a few bases and won a few games. Now there is Clay Bellinger, whose strength is versatility. Joe Girardi was once the Yankees' backup catcher, and now the backups are Jim Leyritz and Turner.But while the Yankee bench doesn't seem as deep or as strong, it is contributing in meaningful ways. Leyritz is hitting .125, but on April 16, his home run in the seventh inning snapped a 4-4 tie with the Kansas City Royals. Three days later, Johnson started and spurred the offense with four hits and two steals against the Texas Rangers. When the Rangers tied the game in the ninth inning that day, Bellinger slammed a game-winning home run in the 10th inning. Even Alfonso Soriano slugged an important home run in his otherwise turbulent and temporary tenure as third baseman.Delgado and Turner stepped in tonight, with Ledee moving to the leadoff spot. The Yankees led by 1-0 after Bernie Williams hit a solo home run in the fourth inning. Scott Brosius singled to open the fifth, and Turner -- who found himself nervous all day, ''feeling butterflies'' before his first start with the Yankees -- hammered a double against the center-field fence. Brosius stopped at third.Delgado was next. He learned just before batting practice that he would play, and he didn't know anything about Knoblauch's injury until reporters told him after the game. But what Delgado did know, as he batted in the fifth inning, was that Cleveland's Bobby Witt would challenge him with fastballs. ''They wanted me to show what I can do,'' Delgado said after the game, before pausing, then adding. ''But I can play.''Delgado lined a ball between the outfielders in right and center, the ball rolling and rolling, Brosius and Turner scoring. Delgado stood at second with two R.B.I. -- matching Knoblauch's total for the first month of the season.Turner had never worked with Pettitte in spring training, only watching him from afar. They sat together in the dugout during Monday's game, discussing how they might try to pitch against the Cleveland hitters, something the American League has done with great success this year. Coming into tonight's game, the Indians had scored only 121 runs, third fewest in the league, ahead of the Detroit Tigers (84 runs) and, amazingly, the first-place Yankees (114).Pettitte retired the first 12 batters he faced, nine of those on groundball  outs, and no Cleveland batter hit the ball out of the infield in the first four innings. Manny Ramirez opened the fifth with a single and Pettitte wavered, walking home a run.But Pettitte recovered, and in the seventh, Ledee lifted a home run deep into the right-field stands; he muted his smile until he returned to the dugout, and then, Torre said, ''He was cheesing from ear to ear.''Jeff Nelson took over in the seventh and pitched two innings, Mariano Rivera overcame an error and an unearned run in the ninth, whiffing Enrique Wilson to end the game.The bullpen has an earned run average of 1.31 over its last 11 games. The starters have an E.R.A.  of 1.67 in the last turn through the rotation. The names in the lineup can be obliterated, blacked out, changed and switched, but so long as the Yankees get that kind of pitching, there won't be any revisionism in the American League.BASEBALL
HAMADA-Dorothy, nee Fleishman, of West Caldwell, N.J. on Monday, May 1st, age 91. Beloved wife of the late Joseph Hamada. Devoted mother of Roslyn Gore of Clifton, N.J and Edwin Hamada. Dear Sister of the late Rose Wenig and Bernard Fleishman. Loving grandmother of Ada (Kathy) Jill, Audrey, Jacobs (Sean), Wendy Gordon (Bradley), Matthew and Nikelle. Services at Jewish Memorial Chapel, 841 Allwood Rd., Clifton, N.J. today at 9:00amHAMADA-Dorothy, nee Fleishman, of West Caldwell, N.J. on Monday, May 1st, age 91. Beloved wife of the late Joseph Hamada. Devoted mother of Roslyn Gore of Clifton, N.J and Edwin Hamada. Dear Sister of the late Rose Wenig and Bernard Fleishman. Loving grandmother of Ada (Kathy) Jill, Audrey, Jacobs (Sean), Wendy Gordon (Bradley), Matthew and Nikelle. Services at Jewish Memorial Chapel, 841 Allwood Rd., Clifton, N.J. today at 9:00am
SOLDIER OF FORTUNE does not simply push the envelope for computer-game violence. It seals the envelope, stamps it and posts it, then empties a clip into the mailbox for good measure.In fundamentals, this new first-person shooter developed by Raven Software doesn't appear significantly different from similar games on the market. Cast as a mercenary on the trail of stolen nuclear warheads, the player explores a hostile three-dimensional environment through 26 game levels spread over 10 missions, lays waste to a host of enemies and uses an array of weapons and supplies.SOLDIER OF FORTUNE does not simply push the envelope for computer-game violence. It seals the envelope, stamps it and posts it, then empties a clip into the mailbox for good measure.In fundamentals, this new first-person shooter developed by Raven Software doesn't appear significantly different from similar games on the market. Cast as a mercenary on the trail of stolen nuclear warheads, the player explores a hostile three-dimensional environment through 26 game levels spread over 10 missions, lays waste to a host of enemies and uses an array of weapons and supplies.The twist: You can inflict wounds with unprecedented specificity. In most shooters, every hit to an enemy does the same amount of damage, regardless of location. (For instance, in Nova Logic's recent Special Forces shooter, Delta Force 2, you can kill enemies as effectively by shooting them in the foot as in the head.)However, 1998 releases like Sin, Vigilance and Tom Clancy's Rainbow Six introduced the concept of ''one shot, one kill'' -- with wounds to the head instantly fatal -- and Soldier of Fortune extends that conceit. An enhanced version of Id Software's Quake II game engine allows the player to hit 26 zones on the polygonal enemy bodies, with results that range from the disturbing to the practical.Playing with all the violence options enabled, I shot off enemies' legs in the opening level in the New York subways. I shot off arms aboard a speeding freight train in southern Africa. I left chests and groins spattered with blood in the Kosovo sewers. (When enemies fell forward, I could see the exit wounds.) In an Iraqi marketplace, guts poked out of the hole I had drilled in an enemy's midsection. In Siberia, I liberated some heads from their bodies and reduced others to something resembling partially eaten apples.And when I finished a level, I was provided with a checklist of carnage performed, including ''throat shots,'' ''head shots'' and, ahem, ''nether region shots.'' These are unusual things for a computer game to be adding up.Does the game go too far? Initially, I would have said yes. How many ways should you really see an enemy's head explode? (Soldier of Fortune is not suited for children. Parents and the squeamish will be grateful for a password-protected filter that allows users to disable five violent elements in the full-violence version. A ''tactical low-violence'' version is also available in which the filter is permanently enabled.)But it turns out that once you've seen one screaming soldier with his leg shot off, you've seen them all. The effects are shocking the first few times around, and then they begin to recede into the body of the game.And there is something to be said for a game that offers enduring evidence of the player's passage through the game world. Details like bullet holes and bloodstains on walls helped make Duke Nukem 3D a huge hit in the mid-90's, and it might be argued that Soldier of Fortune represents the next bloody footstep in this trend.The treatment of violence isn't the only creative twist. Soldier takes a novel approach to saved games. Saves are snapshots of the player's position, which enable one to resume play from a given point at a later time. Most three-dimensional shooters allow saves at any point during the game -- a strategy that allows players to finish games more easily, but one that, when abused, can squeeze the fun out of a game by sacrificing its challenge.Soldier gears the number of saves allowed to the difficulty level selected at the start of a new game -- from unlimited at the Effortless level to five at the Medium level and none at the Unfair level. At the harder levels, that turns saving from a simple reflex into a strategic decision. Can you finish the rest of an unseen level with the available saves?Soldier also takes a step toward addressing reduced capacity in injured enemies. In most games, enemies simply pound away at the player until they are killed, regardless of the level of damage they have taken. Soldier of Fortune interrupts this cycle. A shot to the leg may leave a live enemy hopping on one foot, and the hopping means that at least for the moment, the enemy isn't shooting at the player. You can also force enemies to drop their weapons and surrender or flee the field. The game in which enemies and the player lose proficiency as they take damage still awaits us, but in the meantime, it's agreeable to find other ways to resolve combat.Gore finds its justification only in what it adds to game play, and when the novelty of blood-spouting necks wore off, I found myself wishing this advanced damage model had served as inspiration for other elements of the game. The creators seem so taken with the depictions of violence that they have neglected the fear and dread that the carnage should inspire in its victims and perpetrators.Enemies with such diverse vulnerabilities should be smart enough to better protect their nether regions -- they are little more than the usual bunch of dumb bunnies -- and engagements should be smaller and more tactical. After all, when you are going up against an army of enemies who are all blazing away at you, you don't have time to try for critical hits. All you can do is survive.Perhaps these shortcomings are a sign that although the developer has surely pushed the envelope, it hasn't finished addressing it.Soldier of Fortune; published by Activision; $45.99; Windows 95, 98 and NT 4.0-SP5; for mature players.GAME THEORY
To the Editor:Gov. George W. Bush's plan to allow people to put their Social Security in the stock market (front page, May 1) is ill advised. I don't consider Social Security to be my main retirement income, but a fallback, in case the stock market doesn't do well.Mr. Bush seems to want to change my portfolio mix arbitrarily without my consent. He would be better advised to see to it that the current system stays in place. I want some of my retirement to be ''risk free.''ELMER C. HARTMAN  Canandaigua, N.Y., May 1, 2000To the Editor:Gov. George W. Bush's plan to allow people to put their Social Security in the stock market (front page, May 1) is ill advised. I don't consider Social Security to be my main retirement income, but a fallback, in case the stock market doesn't do well.Mr. Bush seems to want to change my portfolio mix arbitrarily without my consent. He would be better advised to see to it that the current system stays in place. I want some of my retirement to be ''risk free.''ELMER C. HARTMAN  Canandaigua, N.Y., May 1, 2000
President Clinton visited an elementary school here today to read ''Charlotte's Web'' with fourth graders and promote his latest plan to help states turn around failing schools.The school, Audubon Elementary, was Mr. Clinton's first stop on a two-day tour of public schools in Kentucky, Iowa, Minnesota and Ohio. The trip is meant to draw attention to his proposals to hold failing schools more accountable, increase school construction, open more charter schools and improve teacher quality.President Clinton visited an elementary school here today to read ''Charlotte's Web'' with fourth graders and promote his latest plan to help states turn around failing schools.The school, Audubon Elementary, was Mr. Clinton's first stop on a two-day tour of public schools in Kentucky, Iowa, Minnesota and Ohio. The trip is meant to draw attention to his proposals to hold failing schools more accountable, increase school construction, open more charter schools and improve teacher quality.With only eight months left in the White House, Mr. Clinton is eager to emphasize what he thinks of as his legacy in education, one of his pet issues in his more than two decades of public service.He is also hoping to draw attention to Vice President Al Gore's education proposals while at least indirectly criticizing those of Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, the likely Republican presidential nominee.Mr. Gore's battle against Mr. Bush is expected to be fierce in all four states that Mr. Clinton is visiting on this trip -- Mr. Bush recently ran an advertisement attacking the Clinton administration's education policies in Kentucky and Iowa.Mr. Clinton's school tour also comes at a time when his administration is wrangling with the Republicans in Congress over a major education law that Congress must reauthorize this year.The law, the Elementary and Secondary Education Act, governs how more than $15 billion in annual federal aid to public schools is spent. The Republicans want the money to be distributed to the states in block grants and let them direct it toward any educational programs, including private school vouchers.But the administration would distribute the money in grants targeted to specific programs that it wants schools to embrace, like summer school programs and mentoring for teachers.''The answer to excellence for all our children is not to take money away from our schools through vouchers,'' Mr. Clinton said in a speech to several hundred students, parents and teachers, ''but to combine the money with high standards, accountability, and the tools teachers, children and parents need to succeed.''Many politicians have held up Kentucky as a model for education reform, because a landmark court ruling here in 1989 led to the most comprehensive overhaul of public education the nation had ever seen.A court order required the state to sharply increase aid to poor school districts, which used the additional money to reduce class size, improve curriculums, increase preschool programs and create a statewide testing system.Audubon Elementary School, with 450 students, most of them from families classified as poor, used to have some of the lowest test scores in the state. But it now ranks 18th in the state, with 70 percent of its students performing above average on reading tests.In his speech, Mr. Clinton saluted the school's turnaround and announced that he would send teams from the Department of Education into other states to make sure they are ''meeting their responsibilities on low-performing schools.'' He also announced that the Education Department would begin publishing annual reports listing the nation's lowest performing schools and the strategies being used to improve them.In a morning visit to a first-grade classroom, Mr. Clinton read aloud from a chapter of ''Charlotte's Web'' and then listened to students read from it. He stopped several times to quiz the children on some of the bigger words in the chapter, like ''exertion'' and ''bewilderment.'' He also asked if any of the 19 students had seen the movie version.
I enjoyed Bill Clinton's comedy video for the Washington correspondents' dinner, but does anyone share my uneasy feeling that it might have been the final straw in the unfortunate blurring of show business and politics?Bill had great timing, did his facial shtick well and got the schlump walk perfectly. And I do feel I can call him Bill now. ''Mr. President'' sounds so serious for someone who looked so right hanging out with Stuart, the guy who puts his face in the copy machine in the TV commercial.I enjoyed Bill Clinton's comedy video for the Washington correspondents' dinner, but does anyone share my uneasy feeling that it might have been the final straw in the unfortunate blurring of show business and politics?Bill had great timing, did his facial shtick well and got the schlump walk perfectly. And I do feel I can call him Bill now. ''Mr. President'' sounds so serious for someone who looked so right hanging out with Stuart, the guy who puts his face in the copy machine in the TV commercial.I'm worried, though, about what this will do to Al Gore and George W. Bush. Now that the bar has been raised so high, America will be looking for a major laugh riot talent in the next president of the United States.Mr. Clinton started something in 1992, when he blew his horn on Arsenio Hall's show and appeared on Phil Donahue. Now all the candidates are yukking it up with Letterman and Leno. To prove what? That they're funny? That they're just like us? I don't want presidents to be just like me, and I don't care if they're funny.Out on the campaign trail, George W. appears to be adapting. Last Saturday, I heard him deliver a 10-minute comedy routine at the radio talk show convention. He was relaxed, had a good delivery, and didn't slow himself down with any talk about policies or governing. He did blush when I shook hands with him afterward and said, ''Hey, good material.''Al Gore, on the other hand, while said to be a really amusing guy in person, is not wowing them so far -- though he has made himself more camera-ready with all that work on his pecs.I just hope no budding statesman out there thinks being an experienced, intelligent, hardworking politician is going to be enough from now on. That's a pretty funny joke right there. But it's on us.Susan Silver wrote for ''The Mary Tyler Moore Show'' and ''The Bob Newhart Show.''
When Republican leaders proposed scrapping the current presidential nominating system, they immediately confronted a series of questions, ranging from their motives to their chance of success to whether their new idea would work as they hoped -- or at least work better than the system they wanted to replace.The proposal, unveiled Tuesday, would start the primaries with the nation's smallest states, plus the District of Columbia, Puerto Rico and three tiny American territories. They could have primaries no sooner than the first Tuesday in March. Slightly bigger states could go in April, medium-size states in May, and big states in June.When Republican leaders proposed scrapping the current presidential nominating system, they immediately confronted a series of questions, ranging from their motives to their chance of success to whether their new idea would work as they hoped -- or at least work better than the system they wanted to replace.The proposal, unveiled Tuesday, would start the primaries with the nation's smallest states, plus the District of Columbia, Puerto Rico and three tiny American territories. They could have primaries no sooner than the first Tuesday in March. Slightly bigger states could go in April, medium-size states in May, and big states in June.As outlined by the former senator and Republican Party chairman Bill Brock, the plan seeks to maintain and deepen the public's sense of having a role in the choice of nominees by maintaining competitive races through June, when nearly half the delegates would be chosen. Mr. Brock also hopes the plan would make it somewhat easier for underfinanced candidates to make an impact by keeping the early stages of the race cheap.While many Democrats, instinctively assuming deviousness, were trying today to figure out how the scheme would give the Republicans an advantage, they could not find a lever.Unless the plan suddenly attracts public interest and support, a truly remote possibility, there is nothing in it to benefit the Republicans over the Democrats. Indeed the burden of making some politicians mad -- and Californians are already in a snit over the idea of their primary being pushed back to June -- falls only on the Republicans. Democrats can sit back and see what happens.As to the likelihood of success, Republicans can probably get this plan past their rules committee, on which territories and small states have one vote each, just like California.But they could have a difficult time at their convention, where the big states pushed back to June have more votes. After that, they would try to make some post-election deal with the Democrats and try pushing the states to change their primary dates. In sum, a very difficult task.But would it work? Previous efforts to change the system have not always succeeded as the sponsors had hoped. Some failed immediately. In 1988, for instance, Southern Democrats' effort to exert conservative influence by grouping their primaries on what became known as Super Tuesday failed, giving more aid to two liberal candidates, Michael S. Dukakis and Jesse Jackson, than their favorite son, Al Gore.Others fail over time, like the 1974 Federal Election Campaign Act, which ensured clean presidential races until the accountants figured out soft money in 1988 and perfected it in 1992.Two operational problems stand out. Nelson Polsby, a political scientist at the University of California at Berkeley, said the news media would thwart the plan by continuing to declare winners on the basis of the early primaries. News organizations, he said, ''legitimately report early results and these early results influence later results.''Thomas Patterson, a Harvard political scientist, said he thought the first time a bunch of primaries came on the same day, the results would be covered as if they were decisive.Mr. Brock disagreed. ''The press is composed of human beings, and they very much like a contest, and that makes news.'' If the contest lasted until the third group of states, in May, ''the odds of anyone having mathematical certainty are zero,'' he said. ''I think people would be very careful until the big states are heard from.''Another major problem would be money. One dirty little secret of the present system is that while it schedules primaries from January until June, the federal matching grant system does not provide money for a primary contest that lasts beyond April, when recent races have been over. Even the wealthy Bush campaign, which rejected public funding to avoid donation limits, would be flat broke if it were still buying television time today.Bob Shrum, a veteran Democratic consultant now working for Vice President Gore, said that ''for people who are relying on public funding, it would be a huge problem.''He added: ''People spend early to try to get a knockout. They would run out of gas.''Former Gov. Lamar Alexander of Tennessee, an early dropout from this year's Republican race, said a stretched-out calendar would help lesser-known candidates, but the goals would not be reached with the current $1,000 limit on campaign contributions.''I don't know where we ever got the idea that it takes money to put out The New York Times, and invade Normandy and to build New York University -- but not to run for president,'' Mr. Alexander said.Mr. Brock said his critics were right -- ''if people acted as they do now.'' He said if candidates prepared for a long haul, they would spend more carefully.He said that would give ''lesser-known candidates a chance to stay in, which is very much a part of our purpose.'' But, he said, ''maybe this will force us to address the insanity of present campaign laws which promote the importance of money over issues.''Darrell West, a political scientist at Brown University, suggested that even without more money, the Brock system could work if it forced candidates to reach voters in ways other than television advertisements, by emphasizing debates, the Internet and personal campaigning.Even skeptics like Mr. Alexander said the proposed system would be ''much better than the crammed-up primaries we have today.'' Professor Polsby said ''it might shift the front load to middle front load.'' And Mr. Brock said: ''There is no perfect system. We're trying to improve the present system. We don't say this is nirvana.''THE 2000 CAMPAIGN: THE REPUBLICAN PLAN
In both the Republican and Democratic parties, the presidential primaries this year were intense, competitive and, as a practical matter, over very quickly. Especially on the Republican side, there was a feeling that a more leisurely schedule would have given voters a better chance to think about the dramatic contrasts in style and message presented by Gov. George W. Bush and Senator John McCain. Now, a Republican Party commission led by Bill Brock, a former senator and party chairman, has put forward a plan to slow down the primary season so that it is more likely to last a full four months. This is a sound plan that ought to be adopted by the Republican National Convention this summer and copied by the Democrats, as well.The Brock commission proposes that small and medium-sized states vote on a population-based schedule from early March through May, choosing 53 percent of the delegates. Then the biggest states, including New York, California, Florida and Texas, would vote on the first Tuesday of June. Some critics say the contest could be decided before the megastates weighed in, but it is equally possible that their role could be decisive in a close contest.In both the Republican and Democratic parties, the presidential primaries this year were intense, competitive and, as a practical matter, over very quickly. Especially on the Republican side, there was a feeling that a more leisurely schedule would have given voters a better chance to think about the dramatic contrasts in style and message presented by Gov. George W. Bush and Senator John McCain. Now, a Republican Party commission led by Bill Brock, a former senator and party chairman, has put forward a plan to slow down the primary season so that it is more likely to last a full four months. This is a sound plan that ought to be adopted by the Republican National Convention this summer and copied by the Democrats, as well.The Brock commission proposes that small and medium-sized states vote on a population-based schedule from early March through May, choosing 53 percent of the delegates. Then the biggest states, including New York, California, Florida and Texas, would vote on the first Tuesday of June. Some critics say the contest could be decided before the megastates weighed in, but it is equally possible that their role could be decisive in a close contest.Mr. Brock's group did not take a position on whether the Iowa caucuses and the New Hampshire primary should remain the leadoff events. In our view, these traditional events should continue, especially since the longer schedule would prevent them from exerting an exaggerated influence.One tradition that would go by the board is the front-loading and intense early spending that brought this year's primaries to an end by March 7. Mr. Brock's group has produced the best plan we have seen for giving the candidates enough time to develop their campaigns and giving voters across the nation a chance to participate in the primaries. The Brock commission also recommended an end to winner-take-all primaries, a step that would keep party bosses from dominating the process.The presumptive nominees, Governor Bush and Vice President Al Gore, should push their parties to adopt this plan for a fairer, slower, more democratic primary season.
The results of Tuesday's primary elections for governor in North Carolina set up a fall campaign between candidates with starkly different views, particularly on the critical issue of education.The Democratic nominee, Attorney General Mike Easley, is likely to campaign on his plan for a state lottery that would finance a reduction in class sizes in the lower grades. Southern Democrats who defeated incumbent Republican governors in Alabama and South Carolina in 1998 benefited from their support for a lottery, and polls show that the idea of a lottery is popular in North Carolina as well.The results of Tuesday's primary elections for governor in North Carolina set up a fall campaign between candidates with starkly different views, particularly on the critical issue of education.The Democratic nominee, Attorney General Mike Easley, is likely to campaign on his plan for a state lottery that would finance a reduction in class sizes in the lower grades. Southern Democrats who defeated incumbent Republican governors in Alabama and South Carolina in 1998 benefited from their support for a lottery, and polls show that the idea of a lottery is popular in North Carolina as well.Mr. Easley's Republican opponent, the former mayor of Charlotte, N.C., Richard Vinroot, opposes a lottery for North Carolina, though he has said he would support a referendum on it. Instead, Mr. Vinroot's education plan proposes a system of vouchers intended to give parents greater choice in selecting schools.Voter turnout was low for both primaries. Mr. Easley, 50, and Mr. Vinroot, 59, won easily despite spirited challenges from well-financed opponents. With 97 percent of precincts reporting, Mr. Easley led Lt. Gov. Dennis Wicker 59 percent to 36 percent. Mr. Vinroot took 45 percent of the vote while his closest competitor, State Representative Leo Daughtry, won 37 percent. Candidates must win at least 40 percent to avoid a runoff.Mr. Easley and Mr. Vinroot will compete to succeed Gov. James B. Hunt Jr., who has held the office for four of the last six terms.Although Mr. Easley and Mr. Vinroot were not the favorites of their respective party establishments, both ran aggressive television advertising campaigns, and they did not suffer for making fewer public appearances than their opponents.''The old-style politics may not work as well as it used to, meaning going county to county and shaking hands with a lot of people,'' said Thad Beyle, a political scientist at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill. ''The new politics of raising money and paying for your media and looking good on TV worked.''Mr. Easley, a former prosecutor who is considered a moderate, said he would make education a centerpiece of his campaign against Mr. Vinroot. ''To those who seek to dismantle public education by risky schemes of vouchers, let me be clear,'' he said. ''I will fight you every step of the way.''Mr. Vinroot, who ran as more of a conservative this year than in his unsuccessful 1996 primary race for governor, asserted that Mr. Easley ''won by promising to spend more of your money.'' Mr. Vinroot has pledged not to raise taxes, but Mr. Beyle and other observers predicted that the state's deepening fiscal problems and the dynamics of the campaign would force him to move toward the center and reconsider his position on taxes.The presidential race is also expected to have a significant impact on the campaign. Republicans are counting on a strong showing by Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, their presumptive presidential nominee, to help Mr. Vinroot. Mr. Bush is heavily favored to win North Carolina, but the size of a Bush victory could be crucial.''If George Bush is a really strong candidate, if he's winning at the level of Reagan in '84 or Nixon in '72, Easley can hang it up,'' said Ted Arrington, a political scientist at the University of North Carolina at Charlotte. ''If George is more like his father or Bob Dole, there's a good chance that Mike Easley will be our next governor.''In Indiana on Tuesday, Representative David M. McIntosh won the Republican nomination for governor. He will challenge the Democratic governor, Frank L. O'Bannon.THE 2000 CAMPAIGN: THE PRIMARIES
Federal officials today approved the largest broadcast merger in history -- Viacom's $30 billion acquisition of CBS -- just a day after two other media giants resolved a dispute that was, in large part, a byproduct of consolidation in the broadcasting and cable industry.The decision by the Federal Communications Commission to approve a merger that will give Viacom control of 35 percent of the broadcasting market represents the high-water mark of a Clinton administration policy of promoting consolidation in a number of industries as a way of encouraging competition. It was immediately hailed by top executives of the company.Federal officials today approved the largest broadcast merger in history -- Viacom's $30 billion acquisition of CBS -- just a day after two other media giants resolved a dispute that was, in large part, a byproduct of consolidation in the broadcasting and cable industry.The decision by the Federal Communications Commission to approve a merger that will give Viacom control of 35 percent of the broadcasting market represents the high-water mark of a Clinton administration policy of promoting consolidation in a number of industries as a way of encouraging competition. It was immediately hailed by top executives of the company.Sumner M. Redstone, the chairman and chief executive of Viacom, said that the acquisition would be completed on Thursday morning and that CBS's ticker symbol would never again be trading on the New York Stock Exchange.''This has really worked perfectly,'' an ebullient Mr. Redstone said in an interview this afternoon. ''We basically got everything we had wanted.''The administration's policy of permitting consolidation in the telecommunications industry will be on display again later this month, when the F.C.C. is expected to approve a staff recommendation to permit AT&T to complete its acquisition of MediaOne, giving it control of more than a third of the cable industry. Many experts expect that the Justice Department, which is reviewing that deal for antitrust issues, will also approve it.The policy is rooted in the notion that a few corporate behemoths battling over control of the market can be both more efficient and more competitive than any regulation and control from bureaucrats in Washington.''We don't think big is per se bad,'' said Joel I. Klein, the assistant attorney general in charge of the Justice Department's antitrust division. ''We analyze mergers in terms of relevant markets.''But such mergers do not always come without a price. The policy helped both the Walt Disney Company, ABC's parent company, and Time Warner grow into formidable broadcasting and distribution companies in recent years. But this week, some 3.5 million customers of Time Warner cable television lost their ABC signal for almost two days as the two companies wrangled over retransmission agreements.The consolidation has created bottlenecks that have made it easier for one company to block the access of another. Moreover, government officials and industry analysts say negotiations between Time Warner and ABC had grown more strained after Time Warner's announcement that it intended to merge with America Online.Moments after approving the merger of Viacom and CBS, the F.C.C. ruled that Time Warner had violated a regulation that prohibits a company from removing a network's signal during the sweeps rating month and said it would consider what penalty to impose. The fine will be symbolic, as the agency can only  penalize the company $7,500 for each violation each day.But consumer groups say the larger lesson from this week's events is that further consolidation of the cable and broadcast industries will lead to similar disputes and blackouts, as the survivors struggle to control both the content and distribution of what appears on television and the Internet.As the number of dominant players in telecommunications and other industries dwindles, some regulators are also beginning to question how much further the government should go in approving large pending deals.''Quite often the best consumer competition comes from big companies fiercely competing against each other,'' said Robert Pitofsky, chairman of the Federal Trade Commission. ''But in some sectors of the economy, we are running out of big companies.''Mr. Pitofsky declined to discuss his agency's review of the proposed merger of America Online with Time Warner. But other government officials said today that Time Warner's decision to remove ABC this week from its cable systems had undermined the companies' repeated pronouncements when the merger was announced that they would never try to shut out others from using their enormous Internet and cable backbone.In approving Viacom's acquisition of CBS, the regulators gave the companies a year to come into compliance with a rule that prohibits a television network from having an ownership interest in a second network. Viacom holds an interest in the fledgling UPN, and some experts predict that the agency may relax the dual network rule over the next 12 months.Viacom will also have a year to meet the national television ownership cap, which prohibits a company from controlling more than 35 percent of the broadcast market. The combined reach of CBS and Viacom is now more than 41 percent. As part of the regulatory order, the companies will have six months to sell some radio and television stations in the Los Angeles, Chicago, Baltimore, Dallas-Fort Worth and Sacramento, Calif., areas.But those divestitures are relatively small pieces of the deal, which involves the transfer of 38 television stations and more than 160 radio stations.With a few exceptions, regulators during the Clinton years have signed off on big mergers, many of which would have been unimaginable a generation ago.''In merger law, the Clinton administration has a great deal in common with the Reagan and Bush years,'' said John Shepard Wiley Jr., a law professor at the University of California at Los Angeles. ''The analysis has become bipartisan.''By contrast, in the 1960's, the Justice Department successfully blocked one deal that would have resulted in a grocery store merger that would have resulted in a company controlling 7.5 percent of the industry.
In a sharp exchange that gave the presidential campaign the intensity of a day in late October, Vice President Al Gore accused Gov. George W. Bush today of devising a ''secret plan'' that could bankrupt the Social Security system. Hours later, Mr. Bush tartly questioned the vice president's honesty and predicted that Mr. Gore's attacking style would soon backfire.Echoing a theme he has repeated often in recent days, Mr. Gore used a speech to union officials in New Jersey to assert that Mr. Bush, the likely Republican nominee, was quietly developing a ''risky'' plan to allow individual investment accounts in Social Security that would jeopardize millions of taxpayers' savings.In a sharp exchange that gave the presidential campaign the intensity of a day in late October, Vice President Al Gore accused Gov. George W. Bush today of devising a ''secret plan'' that could bankrupt the Social Security system. Hours later, Mr. Bush tartly questioned the vice president's honesty and predicted that Mr. Gore's attacking style would soon backfire.Echoing a theme he has repeated often in recent days, Mr. Gore used a speech to union officials in New Jersey to assert that Mr. Bush, the likely Republican nominee, was quietly developing a ''risky'' plan to allow individual investment accounts in Social Security that would jeopardize millions of taxpayers' savings.''How does the Bush plan propose to deal with the bankruptcy of Social Security that his privatization scheme would cause?'' Mr. Gore told a gathering of A.F.L.-C.I.O. officials in Atlantic City. ''He doesn't even bother to provide an answer. He just smiles and goes on with the smug assumption that there's no need to share with you the details of what he wants to do.''Responding to Mr. Gore's cascade of attacks, Mr. Bush spent much of a plane flight this afternoon from Austin, Tex., to Palm Springs, Calif., telling reporters that the vice president had flatly misrepresented his record on a host of issues, ranging from the Texas budget to his positions on China and Russia to his crime-fighting policies.''Someone running for the highest office of the land should stick to the facts,'' Mr. Bush said. ''I think it is a pattern to say things, to stretch the truth. He's the man who said he invented the Internet.''Asked whether Mr. Gore's aggressive campaigning might work as well against him as it did against former Senator Bill Bradley during the Democratic primaries, Mr. Bush said he planned to respond faster and more forcefully than Mr. Bradley.''It's not going to work here,'' he said.In fact, rather than being aggrieved by his opponent's attacks, Mr. Bush seemed somewhat amused by the constant salvos from the vice president, suggesting that Mr. Gore's strategy was self-defeating.  ''Pretty soon, it's going to have a corrosive effect on his campaign if he's not telling the truth,'' Mr. Bush said of Mr. Gore during the 78-minute airborne news conference. ''The fact that he relies on facts -- says things that are not factual -- are going to undermine his campaign.''He added: ''The more outrageous he gets, the more outrageous allegations he makes against me, the more skeptical people will become.''Mr. Gore's aides clearly disagree. Privately, they contend that the slashing strategy they employed during the primaries will work again in the general election, provided they avoid the appearance of attacking Mr. Bush personally.They have done that, they argue, by focusing on issues like Social Security, tax cuts, health care and gun control.''The primaries showed that voters believe that vigorously debating your opponent on issues is considered fair play,'' said one adviser to Mr. Gore.Mr. Gore also used his Atlantic City speech to discuss his own proposal for keeping the Social Security system solvent.Under that plan, he would use the system's surplus to pay down the national debt, which in turn would reduce the federal government's interest payments. Those savings would then be put back into the Social Security trust fund, keeping the system solvent for an additional 13 years or more.''I will devote all interest from debt reduction to shore up Social Security,'' Mr. Gore said. ''I think it is wrong to cut benefits, raise the retirement age or risk your retirement savings in a game of stock market roulette.''But that description amounted to one brief passage in a 35-minute speech that was devoted mainly to attacking Mr. Bush on a variety of fronts, particularly Social Security.Under the proposal floated by Mr. Bush's aides in recent days, taxpayers would be allowed to invest a small part of their Social Security payroll taxes in the stock or bond markets.Mr. Bush's aides argue that such a plan would help taxpayers take advantage of the stock market's historic growth.But Mr. Gore asserted today that the plan would make the system vulnerable to huge market fluctuations that could hurt millions of retirees. And as he has repeatedly done in recent days, he suggested that Mr. Bush was charting a course that was ''reckless'' and ''irresponsible.''''To me, Social Security is more than a government program,'' he said. ''It is a solemn compact between the generations.'' Governor Bush, he added, ''seems to believe differently.''Mr. Gore asserted that Mr. Bush had ''left the door wide open'' to raising the retirement age for Social Security as a means of bolstering the system.That approach, he argued, would be harmful to people who do strenuous manual labor and physically cannot postpone retirement. And he accused Mr. Bush of wanting to cut Social Security spending to pay for a tax cut that Mr. Gore argues would favor the rich.''What about the waitress who's carrying a heavy tray, what about the longshoreman, what about the steelworker and the auto workers?'' he asked. ''When they get to the current retirement age, they don't want to be told that in order to finance some risky tax scheme for the wealthy, they are going to have to keep on working until they are 70 years old.''Mr. Bush's aides acknowledge that he has not ruled out raising the retirement age. But they note that he has not formulated a detailed plan yet, only the general principles for one. Those include not increasing Social Security taxes, not cutting benefits and setting aside the Social Security surplus in a ''lockbox'' to make sure it is used only on Social Security.It was Mr. Bush's lack of a detailed plan that caused Mr. Gore to accuse the Texas governor of devising a ''secret plan'' today.''He wants to spring it on you after the election,'' Mr. Gore said. ''Well, I think he may be underestimating the capacity of the American people to figure out for ourselves what the details of his secret plan would mean for each and every American.''But if Mr. Gore's barbs were meant to rattle Mr. Bush, they failed. Indeed, what was extraordinary about today's exchange was the almost delighted mood that Mr. Bush brought to his end of it.Mr. Bush was on his way to California for several days of campaigning, including a fund-raiser in Palm Springs tonight for the Republican Party that was expected to bring in about $1 million.On the flight, Mr. Bush revealed a few more glimmers than usual of his obvious distaste for what he seems to see as Mr. Gore's desperation to be president.Usually, Mr. Bush does a more thorough job of pulling his punches when he is asked what he thinks about Mr. Gore as a person.After a reporter told Mr. Bush that Mr. Gore, whose first grandchild was born on the Fourth of July, sometimes says to Hispanic audiences that he hopes his second grandchild will be born on Cinco de Mayo, Mr. Bush muttered, ''Totally pathetic.''At another point, talking about his own desire for the presidency, Mr. Bush said: ''I'm willing to work for it. What I'm not willing to do is sell my soul to become the president.''Asked if Mr. Gore would do that, Mr. Bush arched an eyebrow and said, ''That's for you all to figure out.''Mr. Bush did not use the word ''lied,'' and when reporters did, he corrected them, coyly repeating again and again that he was simply setting the record straight and expressing his ''disappointment'' in Mr. Gore's behavior.But he did use the words disappointment or disappointed at least half a dozen times.''The vice president said I've never submitted a budget as governor of Texas'' said Mr. Bush, reciting the comments by Mr. Gore that he deemed untruthful. ''He talked about recidivism rates that were totally inaccurate numbers.''''He said I called China and Russia enemies,'' Mr. Bush added. ''Have I ever referred to China and Russia as enemies?''Mr. Bush shook his head and veered toward what he clearly intended to be a kind of emotional and moral high ground.''I just am disappointed and I think Americans will be disappointed when they find out the truth,'' he said.In Their Own WordsVICE PRESIDENT AL GORERemarks at a convention of the New Jersey State A.F.L.-C.I.O. held yesterday in Atlantic City, N.J.:''Now we face a basic choice. Will we use our prosperity to lift up our working families and meet our responsibilities to our parents and to our children and make sure that no one is left behind? Or will we go back to where we were eight years ago?Will we roll the dice in the same casino economics that devastated our economy and hurt working families? Does anyone in this room think we should go back to the union-busting, job-destroying, budget-busting policies of the Bush-Quayle years. I don't think so. . . .There are deep and profound differences between Governor Bush and me. Not personal differences, but real differences on the issues. I believe America has to put its fundamental responsibilities first. We have to pay down our debt, we have to save Social Security, we have to lift up working families.George W. Bush believes instead that our top priority should be a reckless $2 trillion tax giveaway lavishing more on those who already have the most. . . .His tax plan is bigger than anything Newt Gingrich ever dreamed of proposing. That may be why Governor Bush does not set aside a single penny for Medicare. And I believe his approach to Social Security is even more irresponsible.''GEORGE W. BUSHSpeaking yesterday aboard his campaign plane en route to California:''The vice president said I've never submitted a budget as governor of Texas. He talked about recidivism rates that were totally inaccurate numbers. . . .The more outrageous he gets, the more outrageous allegations he makes against me, the more skeptical people will become. I will respond. But I'm going to respond in a way that doesn't allow him to drag the process down. One of our jobs in this campaign is to make clear what the facts are.''THE 2000 CAMPAIGN: THE INFIGHTING
In a federal lawsuit filed today, Congressional Democrats accused Representative Tom DeLay, the House majority whip, of engaging in extortion, racketeering and money laundering in his aggressive fund-raising for Republican candidates and causes.Representative Patrick J. Kennedy, chairman of the Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee, said the suit was filed in Federal District Court here in an effort to stop ''massive illegal conduct'' by Mr. DeLay, a Texas Republican who has raised millions of dollars for the Republican party through a variety of committees.In a federal lawsuit filed today, Congressional Democrats accused Representative Tom DeLay, the House majority whip, of engaging in extortion, racketeering and money laundering in his aggressive fund-raising for Republican candidates and causes.Representative Patrick J. Kennedy, chairman of the Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee, said the suit was filed in Federal District Court here in an effort to stop ''massive illegal conduct'' by Mr. DeLay, a Texas Republican who has raised millions of dollars for the Republican party through a variety of committees.The suit is the third attempt in the last year by Democrats to corral Mr. DeLay's fund-raising empire that some critics and admirers call ''DeLay Inc.'' Democrats last year complained to the Justice Department and the Federal Election Commission about Mr. DeLay's tactics, without immediate result.''Mr. DeLay is unfortunately conducting these activities under the color of his office,'' Mr. Kennedy said at a news conference today. ''He seeks through the use of systematic extortion to coerce the contribution of millions of dollars to Republicans and to intimidate those inclined to support Democrats.''Mr. DeLay declared himself ''saddened and disappointed'' that Democrats would tarnish the House's dignity ''by resorting to ugly, unfounded, politically motivated charges for their own political gains.''Jonathan Baron, a spokesman for Mr. DeLay, said that the charges are baseless and that Mr. DeLay would vigorously contest them, if they are not quickly dismissed by the court.''This is a tactic designed to limit Republican fund-raising, that's all this is,'' Mr. Baron said.The lawsuit tries to apply the civil provisions of the Federal Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations Act, known by the acronym RICO, to Mr. DeLay's fund-raising activities through a variety of linked committees.The evidence is drawn chiefly from news reports over the last year that detail Mr. DeLay's forceful efforts to persuade corporate lobbyists to donate large sums to political action committees he and his associates control.Robert F. Bauer, the Democratic lawyer who drew up the complaint, said he believed it was the first time the racketeering statute has been applied in a political fund-raising case, although the conservative legal watchdog group Judicial Watch cited the law in one of its complaints against the Clinton-Gore re-election committee of 1996.Mr. Bauer said the law can be applied against any form of bribery or extortion by an organized group. He also said federal money-laundering laws govern political as well as criminal activities.However, Kenneth A. Gross, a former chief of enforcement at the Federal Election Commission, said the effort to apply the racketeering law to political fund-raising was creative but legally questionable.''There's no question that Mr. DeLay is an aggressive fund-raiser,'' Mr. Gross said, ''but to allege that he's crossed the line into racketeering as a legal matter is a real stretch.''Mr. Gross speculated that the Democrats were hoping to use the lawsuit to engage in extensive pre-trial discovery, allowing them to pore over the records of Mr. DeLay's various fund-raising committees.The lawsuit names several DeLay-related committees as part of a scheme to extort and launder illegal political funds, but focuses on the Republican Majority Issues Committee, a group that plans to spend $25 million on voter turnout and issue advertising in the fall campaign.The group is organized under a provision of the Internal Revenue Code known as section 527, which allows it to raise and spend unlimited amounts with no disclosure, as long as it does not advocate the election or defeat of candidates. The Democrats contend that such activities amount to illegal money laundering.Karl Gallant, chairman of the Republican Majority Issues Committee, said the lawsuit was a threat to the group's free-speech rights and an effort by Democratic ''hacks'' to stifle independent political groups. He said liberal groups were also taking advantage of the section 527 loophole.THE 2000 CAMPAIGN: THE MONEY FIGHT
For its annual gala here on May 24, the Democratic Party is offering tickets ranging from an affordable $50 to a platinum price of $500,000, the highest amount either party has charged for admission to a fund-raising gala.The donors and fund-raisers who give or collect $500,000 will be given a package of perks that includes an invitation to a private dinner with President Clinton at a Washington restaurant on the eve of the gala and front-row seats, in the so-called ''platinum section'' of the MCI Center, for the gala's entertainment. The comedian Robin Williams leads the list, along with the musicians Stevie Wonder and Lenny Kravitz.For its annual gala here on May 24, the Democratic Party is offering tickets ranging from an affordable $50 to a platinum price of $500,000, the highest amount either party has charged for admission to a fund-raising gala.The donors and fund-raisers who give or collect $500,000 will be given a package of perks that includes an invitation to a private dinner with President Clinton at a Washington restaurant on the eve of the gala and front-row seats, in the so-called ''platinum section'' of the MCI Center, for the gala's entertainment. The comedian Robin Williams leads the list, along with the musicians Stevie Wonder and Lenny Kravitz.The gala is a tribute to Mr. Clinton, led by his close friend Terry McAuliffe, who offered last year to put up $1.35 million of his own money for the Clintons' house in Chappaqua, N.Y. The event features the widest gulf in donor levels ever seen at a political fund-raiser here.Prolific fund-raisers and generous donors will also be invited to attend a private reception with Mr. Clinton and Vice President Al Gore before the gala.S. Daniel Abraham, the chairman of Slim-Fast Foods of West Palm Beach, Fla., recently wrote a check for $500,000, which the national committee deposited on May 1, party officials said today.At its black-tie gala last month, the Republicans raised a record-shattering $21.3 million, a sum composed mostly of large, unregulated checks of $100,000 or more. Nearly 50 Republican fund-raisers gave $250,000 each. And the Republicans have a big-money club of donors, known as the Regents, who each pay $250,000. The Democrats have their own big-money club: members of Leadership 2000 each give or collect $350,000.The sharp escalation of campaign contributions, or ''donation inflation,'' as some fund-raisers call it, has alarmed many who advocate changes in the campaign finance system, and they reacted with outrage today at the $500,000 fund-raising level established by the Democrats.''The spiraling obscenity of craven campaign finance efforts will not stop unless either the public's outrage starts being felt or corporations and special interests become sickened themselves and balk at paying these absurd amounts of money,'' said Peter Eisner, managing director of the Center for Public Integrity, a nonprofit public watchdog group.Fred Wertheimer, the president of Democracy 21, a public policy group that advocates campaign finance reform, said, ''This is crazy greed, and it would be shameful if there was any shame left in this city.''Democratic Party officials objected to the portrayal of the gala as a soft-money event.''This is a different kind of event meant to bring people from all walks of life to rally around the Democratic Party and the issues we stand for,'' said Jenny Backus, a spokeswoman for the Democratic National Committee. ''It's very disappointing for these reformers, who know better, to try and put a pox on both of our houses, when it is very clear that the Democratic Party is the party that wants to reform the campaign finance system.''Mr. McAuliffe says he is trying to open the gala to thousands of young Democrats, who he says will pay $50 or $100 for tickets. The Democrats want to sell 14,000 arena tickets at prices from $50 to $1,000. And they have contrasted their event, which they say will encourage guests to wear blue jeans and cowboy boots, with the Republicans' black-tie affair last month in tribute to Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, the party's presumptive presidential nominee.But both have one thing in common: many checks of soft money, the large, unregulated contributions.The Republicans received large checks and fund-raising assistance from Phillip Morris and Wayne LaPierre, the executive vice president of the National Rifle Association.In recent months the Democrats have received $350,000 from SBC Communications, the telecommunications giant, and $250,000 checks from both Marc Andreessen, the founder of Netscape, and Mark B. Nathanson, a cable television mogul.''The money for this event is unbelievable,'' said one Democratic fund-raiser. ''It's all because of Terry. He could raise $25 million, or even $30 million, in one night. It will be the most successful Democratic event, by a factor of three.''THE 2000 CAMPAIGN: FUND-RAISING
THE REPUBLICANSBUSH SEEKS HELP -- Gov. George W. Bush of Texas reached out yesterday for an experienced Republican hand, Andrew H. Card Jr., to watch over Bush interests at this summer's national convention in Philadelphia. Mr. Card, vice president for governmental relations for the General Motors Corporation, worked in the White House under President George Bush as deputy chief of staff and later was transportation secretary. He is the second member of the elder Bush's cabinet to join the governor's political organization in recent weeks. The first was Richard B. Cheney, President Bush's defense secretary, who was chosen to run the governor's vice presidential search committee.Alison Mitchell (NYT)THE ISSUESTHE REPUBLICANSBUSH SEEKS HELP -- Gov. George W. Bush of Texas reached out yesterday for an experienced Republican hand, Andrew H. Card Jr., to watch over Bush interests at this summer's national convention in Philadelphia. Mr. Card, vice president for governmental relations for the General Motors Corporation, worked in the White House under President George Bush as deputy chief of staff and later was transportation secretary. He is the second member of the elder Bush's cabinet to join the governor's political organization in recent weeks. The first was Richard B. Cheney, President Bush's defense secretary, who was chosen to run the governor's vice presidential search committee.Alison Mitchell (NYT)THE ISSUESABORTION RIGHTS ALERT -- The National Abortion and Reproductive Rights Action League is promoting Vice President Al Gore with a television advertisement warning that if Gov. George W. Bush, the presumptive Republican nominee, is elected president, he will appoint Supreme Court justices who will overturn Roe v. Wade, the landmark abortion rights decision. The commercials also warn that Mr. Bush ''even supports a constitutional amendment to outlaw abortion.'' Mr. Bush is on record as saying that he will appoint justices who will ''strictly interpret'' the Constitution. Kate Michelman, president of the league, says many pro-rights supporters have been lulled into thinking that the right to a legal abortion is secure when, in fact, it is in danger because two or more supporters may leave the court in the next administration.B. Drummond Ayres Jr. (NYT)THE FAMILIES --REPORT ON FATAL CRASH -- Details in a 1963 accident report say that Laura Bush, then 17, ran a stop sign in the Texas crash that killed a friend in another car. The report, adding information to previous reports of the crash, was released yesterday. Mrs. Bush is the wife of the Republican presidential nominee-to-be George W. Bush, the Texas governor. The report said Laura Welch was driving her Chevrolet sedan on a clear night shortly after 8 p.m. on Nov. 6, 1963, when she drove into an intersection and struck a car driven by her friend, 17-year-old Michael Douglas. No charges were filed.(A.P.)
Faced with lawsuits by 31 cities and counties, the nation's gun companies have broken off settlement negotiations, deciding to rely on their chances that state judges will prove sympathetic or that victory in November will go to George W. Bush.The industry's defiance dashes the hopes of the White House and state and local governments that a recent deal with Smith & Wesson to change some of its marketing and manufacturing practices might lead other major gun companies to fall in line.Faced with lawsuits by 31 cities and counties, the nation's gun companies have broken off settlement negotiations, deciding to rely on their chances that state judges will prove sympathetic or that victory in November will go to George W. Bush.The industry's defiance dashes the hopes of the White House and state and local governments that a recent deal with Smith & Wesson to change some of its marketing and manufacturing practices might lead other major gun companies to fall in line.Instead, people on both sides of the litigation say, the gun companies,  believing that the November elections will be crucial to their future,  are holding off any further settlement talks at least until they see whether Mr. Bush wins the presidency and the Republicans maintain control of Congress.At a minimum, the companies hope that Mr. Bush, who as governor of Texas has been a staunch defender of the industry and of gun owners, will help dampen the growing public sentiment for additional gun control.Beyond that, their hope is that a President Bush would help push through Congress a bill outlawing municipal suits against them. As governor, Mr. Bush got just such a law through the State Legislature with the help of the National Rifle Association.Even if those hopes are unrealized, the companies calculate, Mr. Bush would at least stop the kind of pressure the Clinton administration has put on them through Andrew M. Cuomo, the secretary of housing and urban development, to settle the suits.Although the suits vary by city, they generally accuse the industry of  failing to incorporate enough safety features in handguns and of distributing them in ways that make it easy for criminals and juveniles to buy them. The suits collectively seek many millions of dollars to reimburse the municipalities for their costs related to gun violence.Robert Delfay, president of the National Shooting Sports Foundation, the industry's trade organization, said he believed that as president Mr. Bush would work to pass a law protecting gun makers from municipal suits, ''based on his actions as governor of Texas,'' where he signed not only similar legislation but also a tort-reform measure curbing lawsuits against corporations.In addition, Mr. Delfay said, the gun companies are encouraged by the prospects mentioned for the Republican vice-presidential nomination, particularly Gov. Tom Ridge, who recently signed into law a measure prohibiting Pennsylvania cities from suing the firearms industry.''The industry is looking toward the election as a watershed event on this issue,'' Mr. Delfay said. ''If Bush wins, we could be going in a whole new direction.''Paul Januzzo, vice president and general counsel of one gun maker,  Glock Inc., acknowledged that settlement negotiations had come to a halt and that the industry was hoping for sympathy from a Bush administration. Mr. Januzzo said that the negotiations had ''degenerated into terrorism'' with escalating demands by the plaintiffs and that he no longer trusted their lawyers or Mr. Cuomo. He said the industry viewed Mr. Bush as ''anti-lawyer.''''If this can happen to us,'' Mr. Januzzo said, ''who's next? If the lawyers are successful with the gun industry, you can be sure they will be out there claiming they have done more than anyone to change society since the Supreme Court in civil rights days.''The industry describes the suits, and the negotiations that resulted from them, as an effort by its opponents to win through the courts the kind of controls they could not get enacted in state legislatures or Congress. The companies maintain that a federal law not only barring future suits but also voiding those already filed would withstand challenge.Mr. Bush's camp has been noncommittal about whether he would back the kind of legislation the gun makers are seeking. Scott McClellan, a Bush spokesman, declined to rule out the possibility, saying simply,  ''He has not addressed that at the federal level.''But in a reflection of their more aggressive posture, seven of the largest handgun makers sued 16 of their municipal adversaries last week, and added New York and  Connecticut -- a step that led the attorneys general of those two states to say they were now considering suits of their own against the industry.The gun makers' suit, filed in Federal District Court in Atlanta, asks that the defendants be forced to abandon new policies favoring Smith & Wesson in handgun purchases for their police. The companies contend that those policies, a result of the recent deal with Smith & Wesson, brokered by Secretary Cuomo, are an illegal effort to regulate interstate commerce.One big risk in the gun makers' November strategy, of course, is that  Mr. Bush could lose. In that case, the industry's best hope would lie in favorable treatment by judges. And so far, the industry is batting .500 with them:Of six cases in which the courts have ruled on the industry's requests for summary dismissal of the suits, three -- involving Bridgeport, Conn., Cincinnati and Miami -- have gone the industry's way. In the three other cases -- involving Atlanta, Cleveland and New Orleans -- the suits have been allowed to proceed.One senior gun industry executive said a factor behind the companies' election-related strategy was that the N.R.A. ''has been telling everyone not to do anything till November,  that this administration is history, so don't deal with it.''Indeed, a videotape obtained by Handgun Control Inc. and first reported in today's issue of The Washington Post shows a leading official of the rifle association telling members at a closed-door meeting in February that if Mr. Bush is elected, ''we'll have a president'' where ''we will work out of their office.''The official, Kayne Robinson, the association's first vice president and Iowa Republican chairman as well, also says on the tape that this is ''a critical election,'' in which a Bush victory will produce ''a Supreme Court that will back us to the hilt.''Aides to the Bush campaign did not immediately return phone calls last night about the video, although The Post quoted one campaign spokesman, Mr. McClellan, as saying that ''neither the N.R.A. nor any special interest sets the governor's agenda.''Short of enacting federal legislation, a Bush administration and a Republican-controlled Congress  could achieve the same ends through other means. One way would be to tie federal block grants for law enforcement to a condition that any city accepting the money not sue the gun companies. Federal law enforcement aid to cities and states has typically been through block grants, often with conditions attached. The Clinton administration, for example, has prided itself on providing money for the hiring of 100,000 police officers, who, under the program, were required to be assigned to community policing.But the lawsuits are now moving  through the courts, and many of the cities believe that they will hit pay dirt in the discovery process, finding material weakening the gun companies' position in the same way that documents about nicotine addiction helped force tobacco companies to settle with the states. Two of the gun cases, in Cleveland and Atlanta, have just moved into the discovery phase, in which the two sides can examine previously confidential material relevant to the claims.''This is an industry that has never been investigated by Congress, whose executives have never been put under oath,'' said David Kairys, a professor at Temple University Law School who is an adviser to many of the cities. ''I think they have a lot to lose.''
INTERNATIONALA3-14Seven U.N. Peacekeepers Are Slain in Sierra Leone  Rebels killed 7 United Nations peacekeepers from Kenya and took at least 49 other peacekeepers and civilians hostage. The peacekeepers are part of a United Nations effort to take charge of security in the West African country, which has been torn by civil war.A1Lockerbie Trial Begins  Two Libyans went on trial in the Netherlands, accused of planting a bomb that destroyed Pan Am Flight 103 over Scotland nearly 12 years ago, killing 270 people.A1INTERNATIONALA3-14Seven U.N. Peacekeepers Are Slain in Sierra Leone  Rebels killed 7 United Nations peacekeepers from Kenya and took at least 49 other peacekeepers and civilians hostage. The peacekeepers are part of a United Nations effort to take charge of security in the West African country, which has been torn by civil war.A1Lockerbie Trial Begins  Two Libyans went on trial in the Netherlands, accused of planting a bomb that destroyed Pan Am Flight 103 over Scotland nearly 12 years ago, killing 270 people.A1Antimissile Laser Is Tested  A laser developed by Israel and the United States to shoot down rockets passed its first test at the White Sands Missile Range in New Mexico, hitting a stationary target, American military officials said.A11Conflict in Sri Lanka Worsens  The Sri Lankan cabinet took emergency steps to save money to support the war effort against Tamil rebels, a war that the rebels are winning. In the latest phase of a strong rebel offensive, the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam, a guerrilla group notorious for its suicide bombers, lobbed mortar fire into a strategic military base on Sri Lanka's northern peninsula.A12Fertility Rate Drops in Europe  The collapse of Communism in 1989 was followed by a sharp drop in the fertility rate throughout Eastern and Central Europe that could reduce the region's population by nearly 20 percent by the year 2050, according to a United Nations report.A84 Hostages Killed in Philippines  Four hostages were found shot to death execution-style after Muslim rebels holding 27 captives exchanged fire with Philippine troops near a river crossing. The four dead were a priest and three teachers. Many of the surviving hostages are children who were seized from a school.A7New Tactic on China Trade Bill  Representative Sander M. Levin, Democrat of Michigan, plans to introduce legislation in the House this week that he says will secure much-needed votes for making China's trade privileges permanent and thereby rescue the Clinton administration's top remaining foreign policy goal from a potentially embarrassing defeat.A8World BriefingA14NATIONALA16-25Gore and Bush Trade Barbs Over Policy and Style  Vice President Al Gore accused Gov. George W. Bush of devising a ''secret plan'' that could bankrupt the Social Security system. Hours later, Mr. Bush questioned the vice president's honesty and predicted that Mr. Gore's attacks would backfire.A1Democrats Sue a G.O.P. Leader  Congressional Democrats filed a federal lawsuit accusing Representative Tom DeLay, the House majority whip, of extortion, racketeering and money laundering in fund-raising. He rejected the accusations.A24Census Return Rates Improve  The Census Bureau has received answers from 65.9 percent of the households that got a census form in the mail, a response rate helped along by a strong response from Hispanics and other minorities.A1Albright Admonishes Diplomats  Secretary of State Madeleine K. Albright, angered by recent security lapses that included a lost computer containing secret files on weapons proliferation, told American diplomats that protecting national secrets was at the core of their mission.A18U.S. to Move on Protesters  A senior administration official said the government was ready to begin removing demonstrators blocking military training on a Puerto Rican island, Vieques.A16Gun Companies Change Tack  Gun companies have broken off settlement talks in suits by 31 cities and counties in hope that judges will prove sympathetic or that victory in November will go to the apparent Republican presidential nominee, George W. Bush, who as governor of Texas has been a staunch defender of the industry and gun owners.A16A New Pacific Preserve  The Nature Conservancy has agreed to buy Palmyra atoll, a spectacular cluster of uninhabited coral islets 1,052 miles south of Hawaii, from a Honolulu family.A16EDUCATIONPutting a Premium on College  A study found that higher education is increasingly seen as the ticket to the middle class, with 87 percent of Americans saying ''a college education has become as important as a high school diploma used to be.''A23NEW YORK/REGIONB1-12Officials Blame Hospital For Rape Case's Unraveling  A rape suspect, Anthony Jones, 42, was sentenced to two to four years in prison on a single count of second-degree assault in a plea agreement that arose from Coney Island Hospital's not providing DNA evidence that prosecutors believed would have brought a conviction of rape.B1Arrest in Witness Threat  Edgar Garcia, 21, a convicted drug dealer, was arrested and charged with making threats against a livery driver to stop him from testifying in the shooting of another driver.B3OBITUARIESC20-23Cardinal John O'Connor  The archbishop of New York, the Roman Catholic Church's most prominent spokesman in the United States, was 80.A1CIRCUITSG1-10SCIENCE/HEALTHMarkers for Autism  Scientists have discovered what may be biological markers in the blood of newborn infants who later develop autism and mental retardation.A18Gene Therapy Program Faulted  F.D.A. investigators say researchers at St. Elizabeth's Medical Center in Boston failed to report a death in gene therapy experiments and may have contributed to the growth of cancer in another patient, whose condition was improperly reported.A20ARTSE1-14SPORTSD1-8Toronto Evens Series, 2-2  The Maple Leafs beat the Devils, 3-2, in Game 4 of their four-of-seven-game playoff series.D1U.S. Marathon Hopes Dim  Khalid Khannouchi, the Moroccan-born marathon-record holder who became a United States citizen on Tuesday, said injuries would keep him out of the Olympic trials on Sunday in Pittsburgh.D5BUSINESS DAYC1-20European Exchanges Merge  The London and Frankfurt stock exchanges announced plans for a full merger, as well as an alliance with New York's technology-heavy Nasdaq market. The hope is to build a pan-European trading heavyweight and a 24-hour global market in new economy stocks.A1Werner G. Seifert, chief executive of the German exchange, will be chief executive of the new company, with headquarters in London.C1The Euro's Slide Continues  The euro settled below 90 cents to the dollar for the first time.C1CBS-Viacom Deal Approved  The F.C.C. approved Viacom's $30 billion acquisition of CBS, the biggest broadcast merger in history.C1The F.C.C.'s Cable Bureau said Time Warner had violated a federal regulation when it pulled ABC programming off its cable systems.C6Still in Pursuit of Bestfoods  Unilever seemed poised to sweeten its spurned $18.4 billion takeover offer for Bestfoods.C1Stocks in Broad Retreat  The Dow fell 2.34 percent, the Nasdaq dropped 2.06 percent and the S.& P. 500 lost 2.16 percent.C8Business DigestC1HOUSE & HOMEF1-18EDITORIALA26-27Editorials: Ambitious plans for transit; a chance for better primaries; John Cardinal O'Connor.Columns: Bob Herbert, William Safire.BridgeE12  TV ListingsE13  CrosswordE12  WeatherA20  Public LivesB2
To the Editor:Re ''A Political Babe,'' by Patricia Schroeder (Op-Ed, May 1):I agree that being a ''10'' is not a requirement for leading the country, but women everywhere should recognize that men, too, are constantly evaluated on the basis of their appearance. We need only to recall Michael S. Dukakis riding in a tank or the new earth-tone Al Gore to realize that dress, manner and looks are important parameters of public perception.To the Editor:Re ''A Political Babe,'' by Patricia Schroeder (Op-Ed, May 1):I agree that being a ''10'' is not a requirement for leading the country, but women everywhere should recognize that men, too, are constantly evaluated on the basis of their appearance. We need only to recall Michael S. Dukakis riding in a tank or the new earth-tone Al Gore to realize that dress, manner and looks are important parameters of public perception.Until the public has had an opportunity to get past initial impressions, those seeking office had best be aware that acceptable appearance unfortunately precedes policy issues.NICHOLAS H. HEINTZ  Jericho, Vt., May 1, 2000
Cardinal John O'Connor, the archbishop of the New York archdiocese's 2.37 million Catholics and the Vatican's most forceful spokesman in the United States, died last night at his residence around the corner from St. Patrick's Cathedral. He was 80 years old.Cardinal O'Connor died of cardiopulmonary arrest at 8:05 p.m., said his spokesman, Joseph Zwilling. But Mr. Zwilling said the death was ''the result of the tumor and the cancer that he was suffering from.''Cardinal John O'Connor, the archbishop of the New York archdiocese's 2.37 million Catholics and the Vatican's most forceful spokesman in the United States, died last night at his residence around the corner from St. Patrick's Cathedral. He was 80 years old.Cardinal O'Connor died of cardiopulmonary arrest at 8:05 p.m., said his spokesman, Joseph Zwilling. But Mr. Zwilling said the death was ''the result of the tumor and the cancer that he was suffering from.''Cardinal O'Connor came to New York in 1984 in a glare of publicity and a flurry of controversy, a relatively unknown Roman Catholic bishop from Pennsylvania who was suddenly catapulted into the church's most visible post in the United States.But after 16 years as archbishop of the sprawling 10-county Archdiocese of New York, he had become a familiar and towering presence, a leader whose views and personality were forcefully injected into the great civic debates of his time, a man who considered himself a conciliator, but who never hesitated to be a combatant.The cardinal's failing health in recent months diminished his public appearances and his position as a spokesman for the Roman Catholic Church, but it did not diminish his stature as one of its most powerful symbols on moral and political issues. When Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, seeking the Republican nomination for president, expressed regret on Feb. 27 for not speaking out against racial and anti-Catholic intolerance during a campaign visit to Bob Jones University in South Carolina, he did so in the form of a letter to Cardinal O'Connor.The cardinal was passionately outspoken in his opposition to abortion, the issue that shaped his tenure from the very start. He was unconditional in upholding official Catholic teachings on topics like homosexuality and  the ordination of women. And he was unwavering in his loyalty to Pope John Paul II, who had named him archbishop of New York as part of an effort to restore greater doctrinal and organizational discipline in a  church still feeling the reverberations of reforms undertaken by the Second Vatican Council 20 years earlier. It was frequently repeated, but never confirmed, that the pope had said, ''I want a man like me in New York.''All this gave the cardinal the profile of a zealous conservative in a city where cultural questions of sex and sexuality had eclipsed old-fashioned economic divisions and in a church in which, despite Vatican efforts to quell dissent, papal popularity no longer automatically translated into papal authority.But Cardinal O'Connor was also a passionate defender of organized labor, an advocate for the poor and the homeless, a vocal assailant of racism and anti-Semitism, and an opponent of capital punishment. And although he had spent 27 years as a Navy chaplain and retired with the rank of rear admiral, in the 1980's he condemned American support of counterrevolutionary guerrilla forces in Central America, questioned the need for spending on new weapons systems, and, to the end, remained a cautionary voice about American military actions overseas.These were positions that were rooted in Catholic doctrine and that reflected the stance of Pope John Paul. But they sometimes disconcerted the cardinal's conservative allies, while his liberal critics often ignored them altogether or welcomed them without really believing that they gave a true measure of the man.Projecting the Church Into Public DebatesHis image as a leader was undoubtedly affected by memories of the two cardinals who had preceded him. Cardinal Terence Cooke, who led the New York Archdiocese from 1968 to 1983, kept a low profile and preferred to work through the parishes and the archdiocesan agencies.By contrast, Cardinal O'Connor's willingness to joust with public officials and project the church into public debates recalled the years from 1939 to 1967, when the archdiocesan headquarters of Cardinal Francis Spellman was known as the Powerhouse for the leverage the church wielded in city affairs.But the comparison was deceptive, because New York City and the church had changed. The migration to the suburbs had thinned the church's solid constituency, especially among the Irish, and neither the new Hispanic immigrants nor the grandchildren of the older Irish and Italian ones were as likely to defer to the hierarchy's judgments.Much of what Cardinal O'Connor tried to do by public pronouncements, Cardinal Spellman would have accomplished behind the scenes. And if Cardinal O'Connor could sometimes still affect city policies with a few phone calls to some politicians, in Cardinal Spellman's day, or so it was widely believed, the calls would have been initiated  by the politicians themselves, who were careful to check their plans with the Powerhouse.Cardinal O'Connor himself rejected the comparison. ''I abhor the concept of Powerhouse,'' he told more than one reporter. ''My job is not to acquire or wield political power.'' But the comparison was inevitable, given the publicity and turmoil that filled his first years in New York.Even before arriving, he had upset many Jews in New York by declaring that widespread abortion in the United States was ''precisely the same'' as the Nazis' murder of six million Jews.At a televised news conference a few months later, he said, ''I do not see how a Catholic in good conscience'' could vote for a political candidate favoring abortion, and, then, when asked whether he might excommunicate Gov. Mario M. Cuomo for his support of abortion rights, the new archbishop refused to rule it out, setting off an intermittent feud with the governor that the press helped to reignite at every opportunity.In his first year as archbishop, Geraldine A. Ferraro, a Catholic who supported abortion rights, was nominated by the Democrats to run for vice president on a ticket headed by Walter F. Mondale. When she was a member of the House of Representatives from Queens, Ms. Ferraro, along with several other Catholic public officials, had signed a letter saying that there was ''a diversity of Catholic opinion'' about abortion.After the letter was released during the presidential campaign, Archbishop O'Connor assailed the candidate, saying, ''Geraldine Ferraro has misrepresented Catholic teaching on abortion.'' He went on to say that there was no diversity of Catholic opinion, only the opinion of the church that abortion was wrong under all circumstances.At Odds With City Over Gay RightsThis set off countercharges that Archbishop O'Connor was signaling church support for the 1984 re-election of President  Reagan, whom he had praised earlier as ''a friend of the unborn.''Locally, the archbishop tangled with the city government over access to contraceptive information and abortion in the church's child care agencies. He also challenged Mayor Edward I. Koch's executive order barring discrimination against gays  by any employer, including the church, that had contracts with the city. When a court struck down the mayor's executive order, the archbishop was equally opposed to a similar bill in the City Council on gay rights, which passed, even though it contained an exemption for religious institutions.Conservative Catholics were delighted to have such a fresh champion in town, but many others, inside and outside the church, were similarly fascinated. For the cardinal's proclivity for confrontation seemed part of a larger spontaneity and directness that seemed right at home in New York City.At his installation in St. Patrick's Cathedral on March 18, 1984, the new archbishop  put on a New York Mets cap, placed his own bishop's miter on the head of a 10-year-old altar boy from the Bronx who was also named John J. O'Connor, and then mimicked Mayor Koch's regular query, ''How'm I doing?''He may have been the only major religious leader to hold a regular press conference every Sunday, after he had celebrated 10:15 Mass at the cathedral. And in his early years, he was usually ready with a curbside quip.Reporters monitored his Sunday sermons and his weekly columns in the archdiocesan newspaper, and pumped him at his press conferences, hoping for a tabloid headline for Monday. The prelate's words were sometimes blatantly misrepresented or ripped out of context, as in a headline in The New York Post on June 17, 1991, supposedly quoting him saying, ''God Is a Man.'' But for a long time this was a price he appeared willing to pay to keep his lines open to the news media.Eventually, he expressed misgivings about the manner of his debut in New York and his high visibility. ''Time after time I have to ask myself if the church would be better off -- certainly, I would be better off -- if when I came here I had just become a silent servant of the people,'' he said in 1993 in an interview with The New York Times.  He wondered whether he might have thrust himself too much into politics, or whether Cardinal Cooke's quieter style had not been better.But then again, he mused, ''If you're false to your own temperament, you're not going to be an effective leader.''At times the Cardinal did try to be more conciliatory. He eventually dropped the Holocaust analogy in his preaching against abortion, and some Jewish leaders came to see him as an opponent of anti-Semitism.  The relationship survived tensions in 1987 over his endorsement of Palestinian hopes for a homeland and a subsequent trip to Israel marked by a series of diplomatic contretemps.Despite emotional evocations of the Holocaust, first before an Arab audience and then at Yad Vashem, he provoked a protest from the Conference of Presidents of Major Jewish Organizations when he acquiesced in a Vatican request to downgrade his meetings with Israeli officials and repeated his pleas for Palestinian refugees. The public rebuke deeply stung the cardinal, but the conflict was patched over and they later honored him as a facilitator of the Vatican's  recognition of Israel in 1993.Before Rosh Hashana last year, the cardinal issued a characteristic expression of sorrow for wrongs that he and fellow Catholics had done to the Jewish people, a statement widely publicized and welcomed by Jewish leaders.Breaking Bread With 'Hizzoner'Cardinal O'Connor also became close friends with Mayor Koch, and the two of them collaborated on a book, ''His Eminence and Hizzoner'' (William Morrow & Company, 1989), regularly dined together and gave each other moral support during their illnesses.Beyond that, the cardinal seemed to mellow in recent years. The cessation of his  weekly press conferences in 1990 may have  symbolized his evolution. Attention more easily shifted to his pastoral activities and day-to-day supervision of the country's  fourth-largest archdiocese, with its 413 parishes, 55 high schools, 238 elementary schools, 882 priests, 3,707 sisters and 17  hospitals that, along with social service and child-care agencies, serve almost three million people annually.The archdiocese embraces Manhattan, the Bronx and Staten Island as well as  Westchester, Rockland, Putnam, Orange, Sullivan, Ulster and Dutchess Counties.  Brooklyn and Queens constitute a separate diocese. The cardinal's office does not publish a consolidated budget, but the archdiocese's annual expenditures are known to be more than $370 million. Its real estate holdings are vast and would bring far more than $1 billion if sold.But these holdings are often in the form of  aging churches and schools that generate more costs than income. Cardinal O'Connor strove mightily, and largely successfully, not to close or merge parishes or schools, as had been done in other large archdioceses in the United States like Chicago, Detroit and Philadelphia.His leadership in national church affairs had also been much more muted in recent years. He and Cardinal Bernard Law of Boston were both named archbishops by the pope in the same year, and were elevated a year later to the rank of cardinal. They were sometimes called Law and Order for their roles as channels of Vatican policy that tightened the reins on the American church.In 1987, for example, Cardinal O'Connor publicly repudiated a policy paper from the 50-bishop administrative board of the National Conference of Catholic Bishops that called for the support of AIDS education programs even when they included information about condoms. The Vatican subsequently demanded that the bishops modify their stance.The cardinal's statements made him the target of gay groups and advocacy groups for AIDS victims, including Act Up, which advertised a demonstration at St. Patrick's Cathedral in December 1989 with pictures of a bull's-eye superimposed on the cardinal's face. During the demonstration, Act Up  members shouted, lay in the aisles and chained themselves to pews during a Sunday Mass.Cardinal O'Connor never ceased to serve on Vatican commissions, sometimes traveling almost monthly to Rome. Nor did he cease to encourage the sometimes fractious elements of the anti-abortion movement.  But after 1990, when the bishops appointed Helen Alvare, a lawyer, as the leading representative of their Pro-Life Activities Committee, his role became less public, and other cardinals, especially Cardinal Law, appeared to take the lead in pressing Vatican priorities.It was in the summer of last year that the cardinal became ill. In August, a tumor was removed from the surface of his brain by doctors at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center. After his surgery and extensive radiation treatments, the cardinal returned to his duties, but his recuperation was marred by setbacks.He was hospitalized for fatigue in October, and recurring weakness caused him to miss his customary celebration of Sunday morning Mass at St. Patrick's Cathedral with increasing frequency. For the first time since becoming archbishop, he was unable to celebrate Mass on Easter Sunday  at St. Patrick's this year.But his illness did not prevent him from paying a farewell visit in February to a frail Pope John Paul II in Rome.In a letter to New York's bishops, the cardinal said he expected the pope to name his successor as archbishop of New York in March. Various candidates are under consideration.Working-Class Roots In PhiladelphiaJohn Joseph O'Connor was born in Philadelphia on Jan. 20, 1920, the fourth of five children of Thomas and Dorothy O'Connor.  His father was a skilled interior painter, a specialist in applying gold leaf to the ornamental ceilings of auditoriums and churches. His mother suffered blindness for a year and attributed her recovery of sight in one eye to the intervention of St. Rita of Cascia.In many interviews and columns he wrote for Catholic New York, the archdiocesan weekly newspaper, Cardinal O'Connor often recalled his early upbringing: the warmth and seriousness of family prayers and religious observances; the forceful views of his father, ''a union man,'' on the rights of labor; the need for frugality during the hard Depression years.His working-class roots, he said, left him always a bit uncomfortable in the formal surroundings of the archbishop's residence  at East 50th Street and Madison Avenue, behind St. Patrick's Cathedral.He attended both public and Catholic grade schools in Philadelphia before entering West Catholic High School for Boys, which was run by the order of Christian Brothers, who encouraged him to pursue a calling to the priesthood.In recent years, his descriptions of the rigors of his life at St. Charles Borromeo Seminary in Philadelphia sometimes made it sound like Marine boot camp designed by Charles Dickens. He stressed that it was always the goal of ordination to the priesthood, which he achieved on Dec. 15, 1945, a  month before his 26th birthday, that made him persevere.For seven years, he was an assistant pastor in a Philadelphia parish. He taught in Catholic high schools as well as a night school for adults, conducted two weekly radio programs on local stations, worked in hospital psychiatric wards and developed special programs to instruct retarded children. His work with retarded children remained a lifelong passion. As a young priest,  he thought it might be his chief occupation until, urged by Cardinal John O'Hara of Philadelphia, he answered the plea of Cardinal Spellman for chaplains to serve in the armed forces during the Korean War.A two-year stint turned into a 27-year career, during which he traveled the world celebrating Mass in foxholes and on aircraft carriers. He served under fire with the Marines in Vietnam, became senior chaplain at the Naval Academy at Annapolis, and, in 1975, was appointed chief of Navy chaplains with the rank of rear admiral. During his military career, he also found time to earn a master's degree in clinical psychology at the Catholic University of America and a doctorate in political science at Georgetown University.Expecting to retire to parish life in 1979, he instead was made an auxiliary bishop assigned to the military vicariate, the church unit serving the armed forces. The vicariate was administered by the archbishop of New York until 1985, when it became independent. Bishop O'Connor was still supervising chaplains, although now from a post in the Catholic hierarchy rather than from one in the Navy.Foxhole Chaplain In VietnamMilitary matters were fated to play a  central role in Cardinal O'Connor's life. In 1968 he published ''A Chaplain Looks at Vietnam'' (World Publishing Company), a book that argued that the American intervention there was morally and legally justified.''I am convinced,'' he wrote, ''that the administration has opted to accept the tragedy of war as the only available road to meaningful peace.''His ministry in Vietnam, he continued, involved him in ''the unglamorous, dirty business of survival, in digging a hole in a sun-baked hill in the boiling dust of 120-degree heat, in slogging through knee-high mud, in fighting insects, tripping over jungle growth, sleeping night after night with one eye open, alert to the whisper of every breeze, the snapping of every twig.''No priest can watch the blood pouring from the wounds of the dying, be they American or Vietnamese of the north or south, without anguish and a sense of desperate frustration and futility,'' he continued. ''The clergy back home, the academicians in their universities, the protesters on their marches are not the only ones who cry out, 'Why?' ''''That's a bad book, you know,'' he later told Nat Hentoff, who was interviewing him for a profile in The New Yorker that was later expanded into the 1988 biography ''John Cardinal O'Connor'' (Scribners).''It was a very limited view of what was going on. I regret having published it.''But as a man who knew the military and combat firsthand, who had published a moral analysis of a war and who had a Ph.D. in political science, he was primed for an assignment that many say changed the course of his career. He was chosen by Archbishop Joseph Bernardin of Cincinnati, later the archbishop and cardinal of Chicago, to serve on a five-member committee of the National Conference of Catholic Bishops that was charged with writing a pastoral letter on peace and nuclear weapons.Archbishop Bernardin, a master at forging consensus, knew the importance of including a full range of views on the committee. From the start, and through all three publicly debated drafts of the letter, Bishop O'Connor was regarded as the conservative, promilitary voice, the counterweight to another auxiliary bishop on the committee, the pacifist Bishop Thomas Gumbleton of Detroit.''I was billed as the Genghis Khan of the committee,'' Cardinal O'Connor later told Mr. Hentoff. Certainly, he was a conduit to the Reagan administration and the Pentagon, consulting with them privately, although with the committee's knowledge, and bringing their views back to the committee. He fought vigorously for wording in the pastoral letter that would keep the bishops from condemning nuclear deterrence altogether, or being identified with advocates of a nuclear freeze, who were opposed to the placement of new medium-range missiles in Europe.In one instance, when other committee members urged a ''halt'' to new nuclear weapons, he argued for the word ''curb.''On several points, including ''curb,'' he lost, but in the end, the former Navy chaplain voted with his colleagues for approval of a document that rejected almost all possible uses of nuclear weapons and that condoned possession of them as a deterrent only if linked to serious steps toward disarmament.The Vatican was intensely interested in the American letter, indeed wary of it, and so were the Catholic hierarchies of France and West Germany. On one trip to Rome,  Auxiliary Bishop O'Connor had discussed the project with Pope John Paul II and Cardinal Agostino Casaroli, the Vatican secretary of state. The impression he made probably explains why, almost simultaneously with the completion of the letter, he was named bishop of Scranton by the pope.Church watchers wondered whether his appointment to a relatively minor diocese was a form of ecclesiastical exile or the first step to bigger things. The question was answered with surprising rapidity. On Jan. 31, 1984, after only eight months in Scranton and four months after Cardinal Cooke's death, he was named the eighth archbishop of New York. His name had not even been mentioned in the speculation about who would fill the post.As is the practice, recommendations from other American bishops had been submitted to the pope by the papal representative in the United States, at that time Archbishop Pio Laghi. Cardinal O'Connor, who had energetically thrown himself into the Scranton job, was taken aback by his selection.''When I went to Scranton, I hoped I would die there,'' he said soon afterward, pausing for effect and then adding, ''I came to New York knowing I would die here.''A Priest, Yes, But Not a Simple OneBecause his predecessor, Cardinal Cooke, had typically described himself as a simple parish priest, a New York reporter asked the newly arrived archbishop, ''Are you a simple parish priest?''''I'm a priest,'' came the reply. ''How simple I don't know.''He was not simple at all, although the complexity of his personality was often reduced by the news media to two Cardinal O'Connors. There was the smiling, quipping Cardinal O'Connor, a dignitary with the touch of the common man, waving and shaking hands and reviewing parades from the steps of the cathedral. And there was the stern Cardinal O'Connor, asserting old or unpopular doctrines from the pulpit and warning those who disagreed that they were in for a fight.Facets of his personality that did not fit into these stereotypes were often overlooked or played down. He was usually soft-spoken, not at all a pulpit thunderer. He had many of the reflective traits of an intellectual who could, in his slow, ruminating answers to questions, do equal justice to the contending sides of a dispute.''He is surely one of the two or three smartest graduate students I ever had,'' said Jeane J. Kirkpatrick, the former ambassador to the United Nations, who taught him when he was a Navy chaplain studying for a Ph.D. at Georgetown.Yet for the cardinal, mulling over the many sides of a question was not incompatible with making spontaneous comments and on-the-spot decisions, so that it sometimes appeared as though a fine balance could be tipped by the latest opinion, a chance encounter or a sudden inspiration.Priests of the archdiocese were divided about how much thought went into some of his statements and appointments. Many joked that their leader's motto was, ''Ready, Fire, Aim!'' But they were also deeply appreciative of his willingness to give them time and attention to supply his counsel or discuss their futures.For Cardinal O'Connor, doubt and misgivings stopped short when it came to defending basic Catholic teachings, the decisions of the pope or what he considered the survival and integrity of church agencies. The combativeness with which he delivered these  expressions of duty made him one of the  most fiercely denounced public figures in New York, if not the country.Gloria Steinem once paired him with AIDS as the two worst things about New York. Frances Kissling, president of Catholics for a Free Choice, an organization that supports legalized abortion, called him ''the kind of man who, if the church still had the power to burn people at the stake, would be right there lighting a fire.''Cardinal O'Connor did not respond to his critics, and his own readiness to confess personal shortcomings and errors offered a disarming contrast, although his critics saw that, too, as calculating. The cardinal's teasing, bantering style of humor could occasionally have a sharp, even mordant, edge, even if the barbs were directed toward himself.Both his confessions of failure and his self-deprecating humor were part of his way of framing issues in personal terms, a trait that also marked his writing and preaching. Once, when he spoke to New York priests about the archdiocese's financial problems, he dwelt on his own sleepless nights worrying about how the church could meet its responsibilities and pay its bills. Some priests left the meeting reassured to learn that he was worrying over the problems. But others reported frustration at not being given specific facts and figures.''I regularly go down to the crypt under St. Patrick's Cathedral, and I look at the tombs of my predecessors,'' the cardinal  wrote in one of his typically personal meditations in his weekly column. ''Right in the center is the next marble block with no inscription. That's reserved for me. And all that's important when I move into that crypt is that I have served New York as a good priest.''DEATH OF A CARDINAL  Correction:  May 5, 2000, Friday  The obituary of Cardinal John O'Connor yesterday referred imprecisely to a comment about him from Frances Kissling, president of Catholics for a Free Choice, which supports legalized abortion. It was in a Vanity Fair article in 1990 that she said the cardinal was "the kind of man who, if the church still had the power to burn people at the stake, would be right there lighting a fire." She did not say it during his illness or after his death.Correction: May 5, 2000, FridayThe obituary of Cardinal John O'Connor yesterday referred imprecisely to a comment about him from Frances Kissling, president of Catholics for a Free Choice, which supports legalized abortion. It was in a Vanity Fair article in 1990 that she said the cardinal was "the kind of man who, if the church still had the power to burn people at the stake, would be right there lighting a fire." She did not say it during his illness or after his death.<br>
HAMADA-Dorothy, (nee Fleischmann). Died May 1, 2000 at the age of 92. Beloved wife of the late Joseph. Devoted mother of Edwin Hamada & Roslyn (Barry) Gore, grandmother of Adam (Kathy) Hamada, Jill Hamada, Audrey (Sean) Jacobs, Wendy (Bradley) Gordon, Matthew Hamada & Nikelle Hamada. Dear sister of the late Rose Wenig Bernard Fleischmann. Adored aunt, cousin and friend to many. Formerly of Brooklyn, NY, and Lauderdale Lakes, FL. ''Dotty'' worked alongside her husband, Joe, at Allied Button Corp. & ABC Button Co in N.Y.C., which they owned until their retirement in 1973. She inspired all who know her & will live in the hearts of her family and friends forever. Services were held May 3. Jewish Memorial Chapel, Clifton, NJ for information.HAMADA-Dorothy, (nee Fleischmann). Died May 1, 2000 at the age of 92. Beloved wife of the late Joseph. Devoted mother of Edwin Hamada & Roslyn (Barry) Gore, grandmother of Adam (Kathy) Hamada, Jill Hamada, Audrey (Sean) Jacobs, Wendy (Bradley) Gordon, Matthew Hamada & Nikelle Hamada. Dear sister of the late Rose Wenig Bernard Fleischmann. Adored aunt, cousin and friend to many. Formerly of Brooklyn, NY, and Lauderdale Lakes, FL. ''Dotty'' worked alongside her husband, Joe, at Allied Button Corp. & ABC Button Co in N.Y.C., which they owned until their retirement in 1973. She inspired all who know her & will live in the hearts of her family and friends forever. Services were held May 3. Jewish Memorial Chapel, Clifton, NJ for information.
To the Editor:A May 2 letter writer presumes to speak for ''middle-of-the-road gays'' who ''resent being taken for granted by the Democratic Party'' and want a ''return to decency, honesty and virtue in the White House,'' even if this means voting for George W. Bush. My middle-of-the-road gay experience is very different from his.To the Editor:A May 2 letter writer presumes to speak for ''middle-of-the-road gays'' who ''resent being taken for granted by the Democratic Party'' and want a ''return to decency, honesty and virtue in the White House,'' even if this means voting for George W. Bush. My middle-of-the-road gay experience is very different from his.I question his assertion that he is ''savvy enough'' to balance his commitments both for equal rights for gays and national integrity when he would support a Republican for president who opposes all calls for equal rights for gays: no hate crimes legislation, no legal recognition of same-gender committed relationships, and no right to serve openly in the armed forces. Equal rights and national integrity are indivisible.ROBERT J. SWITZER  West Hollywood, Calif., May 2, 2000
Monday was Decision Day for many high school seniors choosing colleges, but it came and went without so much as a peep from the Bush campaign about the destinations of Gov. George W. Bush's twin 18-year-old daughters, Barbara and Jenna.How far from home would they be straying? The Texas governor's aides were silent. What factors had the girls' final selection hinged on? Mum was the word. Aides acknowledged that the information would probably trickle out soon enough, through an unguarded utterance by Mr. Bush or an offhand comment by an official at one of the schools. But for just a bit longer, the family wanted to try to preserve the girls' privacy.Monday was Decision Day for many high school seniors choosing colleges, but it came and went without so much as a peep from the Bush campaign about the destinations of Gov. George W. Bush's twin 18-year-old daughters, Barbara and Jenna.How far from home would they be straying? The Texas governor's aides were silent. What factors had the girls' final selection hinged on? Mum was the word. Aides acknowledged that the information would probably trickle out soon enough, through an unguarded utterance by Mr. Bush or an offhand comment by an official at one of the schools. But for just a bit longer, the family wanted to try to preserve the girls' privacy.The Bush family has been remarkably successful at that, so much so that while Mr. Bush could become the next president and while his extended family is beginning to look an awful lot like a political dynasty, his two daughters are almost invisible, their faces unknown to 99.9 percent of voters outside Texas and their public sightings only slightly more frequent than Bigfoot's.They have appeared only a few times on the campaign trail, and they have not shown up in their father's commercials.''From the time he was elected governor, we've had a policy that the girls are not interviewed and not photographed,'' said Karen P. Hughes, the communications director for the Bush campaign and a senior adviser to Mr. Bush since 1994.Far from being out of the ordinary, the daughters' anonymity immediately recalls that of Chelsea Clinton during her father's first presidential campaign, in 1992, and is shared to a degree by the three younger Gore children. (The oldest, Karenna Gore Schiff, 26, has a public role as an adviser to her father's presidential campaign.)And it proves that even in an age when politicians will use most facets of their biographies to market themselves and the press shines a spotlight into many corners of a politician's private life, there remains at least one largely unexploited, scrutiny-free zone. The children are spared.Although President Clinton and his wife, Hillary, have often been portrayed as indiscriminately ambitious, Tom Rosenstiel, director of the Project for Excellence in Journalism in Washington, noted that ''for the most part, the Clintons have not used Chelsea as a campaign tool.''In turn, Mr. Rosenstiel said, ''for all of the controversy and invasiveness of the press coverage concerning Bill Clinton, with a handful of exceptions, the press has respected the Clintons' wish to leave Chelsea alone.''Mr. Bush has similarly benefited from news organizations' voluntary restraint. Austin is not so big a place, and there are reporters whose children -- or whose friends' children -- attend the same public high school from which Barbara and Jenna Bush will be graduating this month. But the fruits of that familiarity have not found their way onto television or into newspapers.Similarly, Mr. Bush trusts reporters on his campaign plane to be cognizant of, and to respect, his wishes that his daughters remain journalistically off-limits, and he thus talks somewhat freely about them on occasion and even mentioned, several times, the kinds of colleges each daughter was considering.Barbara, named for her paternal grandmother, actually hopped aboard the campaign plane on Saturday and used it as her transportation from Austin to New York City to take a last look at one of the colleges near the top of her list. But she kept a careful distance from reporters.Mr. Rosenstiel and several political press secretaries said there seemed to be an unspoken covenant between politicians and journalists: if a politician does not press his or her children into sustained service as political props, journalists have little rationale for examining in detail the children's lives, at least when the children are still school-age.Political analysts noted that while most candidates and elected officials undoubtedly keep their children offstage to protect them, there may be political benefit as well, in that voters are likely to take note of, and admire, that course of action.The personal-biography section of Mr. Bush's Web site digresses to mention, ''Governor and Mrs. Bush have worked hard to protect their daughters' privacy. They attend public school in Austin but do not give interviews and only appear at public events if they want to.''In public, Mr. Bush walks a carefully but not always consistently drawn line. He sporadically delights audiences with a fleeting, vague riff on the agonies and ecstasies of fatherhood and repeatedly mentions that Barbara and Jenna go to a public high school. But he generally furnishes no more specifics about them than about the family's six-toed cat, Ernie.There are exceptions to this reticence, the most conspicuous one being a chapter of his autobiography, ''A Charge to Keep'' (William Morrow & Company, 1999), in which Mr. Bush discusses his support for the death penalty. He divulges that one daughter -- he does not say which -- told him over the dinner table that she disagrees with him.Mr. Bush and his wife, Laura, have said repeatedly that they want Barbara and Jenna, fraternal twins who are the couple's only children, to be affected by their father's political celebrity as little as possible.From what little has been published or broadcast in Texas about the girls, they have managed to maintain relatively normal lives.When the family first moved to Austin, the girls attended the St. Andrews Episcopal School here, but they transferred to Austin High School in the ninth grade.And they behaved as teenagers typically do, bowing to the latest pop-cultural fashions and sometimes remarking on how unfashionable their father was. In interviews with Texas journalists in the past, Mrs. Bush bemoaned that the girls's television-watching habits, at least a few years ago, included ''Beverly Hills 90210'' and ''Melrose Place,'' and noted that they would sometimes stop their father before he walked out the door, questioning his choice of attire.Even as a governor's children, they were not constantly escorted or monitored by guards, but security around the entire family tightened earlier this year with the arrival of the Secret Service, much to the girls chagrin, an aide to Mr. Bush said.''Their friends can no longer pull in the back driveway of the governor's mansion or just drop in and out,'' the aide said. ''That's no fun for teenage girls, and that's been a big change for them.According to the aide and several of Mr. Bush's friends, the girls' low public profile reflects their own desires as much as their parents' efforts. For example, Barbara and Jenna Bush briefly considered accompanying their parents to the polls in Texas for the Republican primary; it was, after all, the first election cycle in which the girls were old enough to vote.But when they found out that photographers would be chronicling their father's movements, they decided not to go. Similarly, Barbara and Jenna appeared on stage with their father only twice in the primaries: once in New Hampshire, on the night that he lost to Senator John McCain of Arizona, and once in Austin.One of Mr. Bush's advisers said Barbara and Jenna Bush had learned early on that even the most seemingly harmless exposure could yield accidental humiliation.About six years ago, when a television crew shot footage of the Bushes decorating their Christmas tree, the telephone rang and Mr. Bush joked that it might be a boy who liked Jenna. When the story was broadcast, it included both that comment and Jenna's mortified reaction.THE 2000 CAMPAIGN: THE FAMILY
Two Democratic senators today criticized Vice President Al Gore's approach to Social Security, saying his plan would make the retirement system dependent on general tax revenue.The senators, Daniel Patrick Moynihan of New York and Bob Kerrey of Nebraska, spoke as they joined with Senator John McCain of Arizona, the recent Republican presidential candidate, to propose a bipartisan Congressional commission to plan a comprehensive overhaul of the Social Security system.Two Democratic senators today criticized Vice President Al Gore's approach to Social Security, saying his plan would make the retirement system dependent on general tax revenue.The senators, Daniel Patrick Moynihan of New York and Bob Kerrey of Nebraska, spoke as they joined with Senator John McCain of Arizona, the recent Republican presidential candidate, to propose a bipartisan Congressional commission to plan a comprehensive overhaul of the Social Security system.The Democrats' remarks were not surprising. Both Mr. Moynihan and Mr. Kerrey supported former Senator Bill Bradley of New Jersey in the Democratic primaries. And both have long differed with their party and favored an effort to overhaul the retirement system that includes individual investment accounts.Mr. Kerrey recently met to discuss Social Security with Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, the expected Republican presidential nomineee.But the trio's push for a commission showed how the heated Social Security debate in the presidential race is reaching Capitol Hill and highlighting existing splits in the Democratic Party.Right after the three senators spoke, two other Democratic senators, Byron L. Dorgan of North Dakota and Charles E. Schumer of New York, held their own news conference to criticize Mr. Bush's interest in including individual investment accounts as an element of overhauling Social Security.''To take a portion of the Social Security system and move it into private accounts, and subject it to substantial risk, I think is moving in exactly the wrong direction,'' Mr. Dorgan said.Social Security has long collected more in payroll taxes than it has paid out in benefits. But that is projected to start changing in 2015, when the baby boomers begin to retire.Mr. Gore and Mr. Bush advocate sharply different approaches to Social Security.Mr. Gore has put paying down the $3.5 trillion national debt at the center of his economic agenda. That would reduce the federal government's interest payments. He proposes to keep Social Security solvent through 2050 by allocating the interest savings to the retirement system.Mr. Bush is to speak next week on Social Security and include a call for putting some portion of payroll taxes into private accounts. Under this approach, part of the retirement benefit would be guaranteed and part would fluctuate with individual investment decisions.Mr. Moynihan and Mr. Kerrey were drawn into spelling out their differences with their party's presumptive presidential nominee by reporters. Mr. Moynihan branded the word ''privatization'' a ''scare word,'' and he and Mr. Kerrey said Mr. Gore's approach would in essence change the very nature of the retirement program.''The American people have to decide,'' Senator Kerrey said, ''do you want to convert Social Security from a program that's been funded by the payroll tax into a program that's going to be funded increasingly with income taxes?''Asked about the commission today, Mr. Gore dismissed the idea, saying: ''These commissions are in the eye of the beholder. I disagree with them, and agree instead with the great majority of Democrats and Republicans in the Senate and the House who are not for privatization of Social Security.''Mr. Bush, campaigning in California, praised the three senators. ''I appreciate so very much the tone of their press conference,'' he said. ''This shouldn't be a partisan issue.''The commission proposed by the senators would report in time for a vote in Congress next year. By then, Mr. Kerrey and Mr. Moynihan will have retired from the Senate.THE 2000 CAMPAIGN: SOCIAL SECURITY
Three weeks before a closely watched vote in Congress on trade relations with China, Gov. George W. Bush of Texas and his advisers are making sure to remind Capitol Hill Republicans of his support for the bill and have not ruled out his calling undecided House Republicans.Aides said Mr. Bush was planning to give a speech the week before the House vote, which is expected between May 22 and Memorial Day, to explain anew why he feels so strongly about facilitating trade between the United States and China.Three weeks before a closely watched vote in Congress on trade relations with China, Gov. George W. Bush of Texas and his advisers are making sure to remind Capitol Hill Republicans of his support for the bill and have not ruled out his calling undecided House Republicans.Aides said Mr. Bush was planning to give a speech the week before the House vote, which is expected between May 22 and Memorial Day, to explain anew why he feels so strongly about facilitating trade between the United States and China.Those remarks will probably be delivered in Seattle or some other city on the West Coast, a region that pins many economic hopes on commerce with Asian nations.''I'll speak out about it,'' Mr. Bush, the presumptive Republican presidential nominee, said aboard his campaign plane Wednesday afternoon, referring to the vote.Asked if he would phone individual Republicans who were undecided, Mr. Bush first said he doubted it, then added, ''I shouldn't say categorically no.''Several aides to Mr. Bush said the possibility of such calls had been discussed by Republican officials on Capitol Hill and some of the governor's advisers in Austin, Tex., but that nothing had been decided.Congress is being asked to establish permanent normalized trade relations with China -- in effect, sacrificing its annual review of China's trading rights -- and to treat Beijing as it does most other members of the World Trade Organization.But one aide to Mr. Bush said the governor was wary of doing anything, on any issue, that resembled outright lobbying, because such actions might appear inappropriate.''Unless and until you are elected, it is best to have a healthy respect for the office of the presidency and the legislative branch,'' the aide said.About two-thirds of House Republicans support the measure and about one-third oppose it, Congressional Republicans say, but 20 to 30 House Republicans are undecided.It could work to Mr. Bush's advantage to sway them, because it would demonstrate that his calls for more open trade with China have not fallen on deaf ears in his own party. Moreover, it would show he can exert leadership over Republicans and promote cohesiveness among them.But Mr. Bush has almost equal reason not to push too hard. Should the measure fail, its loss would owe more to Democratic opposition than Republican and would give Mr. Bush another issue with which to beat Vice President Al Gore, the presumptive Democratic presidential nominee, who also supports it.Mr. Bush could argue that the Clinton administration -- and by extension Mr. Gore -- could not win enough Congressional cooperation to pass any meaningful legislation, political analysts said.Indeed, discussing the vote aboard his campaign jet, Mr. Bush tried to shift the topic from his plans to those of Mr. Gore. Referring to telephoning members of Congress, Mr. Bush said: ''The interesting question is, Will Vice President Gore? Because it's his administration that's trying to get the bill through.''Several House Republican aides said that Mr. Bush would probably not be asked to approach individual Republicans, because House Republicans already knew where the governor stood on the issue and would have factored that into their deliberations.''Not one member has said, 'Is Governor Bush with us? I could use a call' '' one House aide said. ''But if a member says it would be really helpful to get a call from Governor Bush, we'd ask him, and we're confident he'd say yes.''Several House Republican aides said that Mr. Bush would probably not be asked to approach individual Republicans, because House Republicans already knew where the governor stood on the issue.For months along the campaign trail, Mr. Bush has declared his support for permanent normalized trade relations with China.He has said American farms and businesses would benefit from freer access to China's markets, even as the causes of human rights and democracy in China would be served by more exposure to American products and ideas.Last week, Condoleezza Rice, Mr. Bush's chief foreign policy adviser, discussed the issue with House and Senate Republicans, but she said today that she did not meet specifically with undecided Republicans or argue Mr. Bush's position.''I was more asking them questions about where it all stood than pressing an agenda,'' Ms. Rice said. ''They have no questions about where he stands. He's made it very clear.''THE 2000 CAMPAIGN: THE TEXAS GOVERNOR
Millions of faithful admirers and staunch foes from years of inspiration and controversy yesterday marked the passing of Cardinal John O'Connor, America's most influential Roman Catholic leader, with quiet prayers, thoughtful evaluations and tributes from across the region and around the world.From St. Patrick's Cathedral to the Vatican, from City Hall and the White House to hundreds of churches, schools and hospitals of the Archdiocese of New York, there was an avalanche of praise for the 80-year-old cardinal, who died at his Manhattan home on Wednesday night after an eight-month struggle with brain cancer.Millions of faithful admirers and staunch foes from years of inspiration and controversy yesterday marked the passing of Cardinal John O'Connor, America's most influential Roman Catholic leader, with quiet prayers, thoughtful evaluations and tributes from across the region and around the world.From St. Patrick's Cathedral to the Vatican, from City Hall and the White House to hundreds of churches, schools and hospitals of the Archdiocese of New York, there was an avalanche of praise for the 80-year-old cardinal, who died at his Manhattan home on Wednesday night after an eight-month struggle with brain cancer.Much of it was in the lofty locutions of politicians and national leaders of the Catholic Church and other religions, organized labor and those in positions of power or privilege. But some of it came from ordinary people who recalled his 16-year tenure as an unwavering spokesman for Catholic doctrines and as a compassionate advocate for the homeless, the poor, the sick and working people.But there were also criticisms -- tempered perhaps by the silent authority of the dead -- that sought to evaluate a powerful churchman who had been outspoken in his opposition to abortion and homosexuality, who had had stormy contretemps with gays and those who opposed his views against contraception and on the role of women in the church.On the first of five solemn days leading to a funeral on Monday, church officials scheduled daily masses and public viewings of the cardinal's body at the cathedral, an ailing Pope John Paul II named the Vatican Secretary of State to represent him at the funeral, and the long-awaited papal selection of a successor to Cardinal O'Connor was expected soon, stirring much speculation.It was a day of mourning, and of almost ethereal beauty. At the cathedral on Fifth Avenue, votive candles flickered in the shadows, flowers were banked and a river of people streamed in the great doors. They settled on their knees in nave and transept and before the crypt where the cardinal will be interred alongside his predecessors on Monday.Some told their rosaries under the Florentine light of the stained glass. Some wept silently, ashen-faced and heads bowed. Some were regulars at the morning masses, others had gone out of their way to pay a visit to the cathedral. Afterward, a few spoke of the cardinal and of themselves.''I just got off the train on my way to work, and I wanted to stop by,'' said Roslyn Rawls, a paralegal from Connecticut. ''I can't say I agreed with his positions'' -- she mentioned abortion and his role in the military -- ''but I think what's important about him is that he had a strong voice, a big voice.''Nelson Ponce, 43, a United Parcel driver who veered from his route to go to the cathedral and pray for the cardinal, said: ''He was such a great person, not just for the church people, but for the whole city. I feel like I owe him so much. Spiritually, I feel there's a gaping hole in our hearts now.''While voices of sorrow were common, some said the cardinal's death was a kind of blessing because his months' of suffering had ended. ''I don't consider today sad because he accomplished what he set out to accomplish, and he's gone on to a better life,'' said Chuck Costello, 45, an elevator repairman.At the Catholic Center on First Avenue, the headquarters of the archdiocese, workers who saw the cardinal regularly recalled him not as a world leader but as a friendly boss who had time for a bantering chat or a kindly remark.Munir Hamlani, who works a security detail with C.J. Brown, said the cardinal seemed to know everyone on a first-name basis. ''He'd come in and he'd say 'Hi C.J. Hi Munir,' '' Mr. Hamlani said. ''He was a very pleasant, very nice person. Everybody here feels the same as I do, I believe.''Praise and sympathy for the cardinal were not, however, universal sentiments. In Westchester County, interviews at Holy Innocents Roman Catholic Church in Pleasantville and at St. Agnes Hospital and Children's Rehabilitation Center in White Plains showed hints of mourning, and a few almost perfunctory expressions of regret at his death, but no upwelling of emotions.At the Church of the Resurrection in Rye, the Rev. Jack Arlotta, the associate pastor, said there had been no outpouring of grief. ''Most people knew he had been very sick a long time,'' he said. ''They were sad, but not in shock.''At St. Cecilia's Roman Catholic Church on East 106th Street in East Harlem, Sister Regina Burns, who has been counseling and feeding people with AIDS for 12 years in a program that receives federal and private funds but no church support, said Cardinal O'Connor had been of little help to her ministry.''Two years ago on the 125th anniversary of our church, Cardinal O'Connor came here for mass,'' she said. ''He included in his talk the fact that we have an AIDS ministry. He was very happy and proud that we are ministering to people with H.I.V./AIDS.'' But, she added: ''I would like to have seen him dialogue more with our homosexual community.''At the ethnically diverse, all-male St. Regis High School on the Upper East Side, interviews with students suggested that the cardinal was not the leader they looked to in their religious lives, and that the Catholic Church of the future will be more inclusive and less conservative.''He kicked gay people out of a parish and threatened excommunication for public leaders who backed abortion,'' said Lawrence David, 16. ''As teenagers, we've grown up in a very different world, so it's hard to identify with someone who had views like that.''The cardinal's relationship with Jews was remembered as one that evolved -- and improved -- over the years. Even before arriving in New York in 1984, he had upset many Jews by declaring that abortion in America was ''precisely the same'' as the murder of six million Jews by the Nazis.He eventually dropped the Holocaust allusion and some Jewish leaders came to see him as an opponent of anti-Semitism. He was praised yesterday by Abraham H. Foxman, national director of the Anti-Defamation League, as ''stalwart in his support for the Jewish community.''Israel's Foreign Minister, David Levy, paid tribute to the cardinal in a communique. ''Israel and the Jewish people have lost a true friend, a man of great moral and spiritual strength,'' Mr. Levy said. ''Cardinal O'Connor worked for many years to bring together the Jewish people and the Roman Catholic Church.''Praise for the cardinal came from President Clinton, Gov. George E. Pataki, the Rev. Billy Graham, the presidential rivals Gov. George W. Bush of Texas and Vice President Al Gore, the Senate rivals Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani and Hillary Rodham Clinton, United Nations Secretary General Kofi Annan and many others. In general they were much the same, with phrases about the cardinal's ''eloquent voice,'' and ''courage, selflessness and devotion to duty.''Pope John Paul II praised the cardinal and said he would send Cardinal Angelo Sodano, the Vatican Secretary of State, to represent him at the funeral at 2 p.m. on Monday. But there was no word on a successor to head the diocese that embraces 2.37 million Catholics in 10 counties with 413 parishes and hundreds of schools, hospitals and other institutions.DEATH OF A CARDINAL: THE OVERVIEW
Al Gore delivered a provocative foreign policy speech Sunday that raised an important question: Does George W. Bush have the experience, the gravitas and, by implication, the brains to run U.S. foreign policy?If not, said Mr. Gore, one can only assume that ''the gaps in Governor Bush's foreign policy views and experience will be filled by the ideologies and inveterate antipathies of his party -- the right-wing, partisan isolationism of the Republican Congressional leadership.''Al Gore delivered a provocative foreign policy speech Sunday that raised an important question: Does George W. Bush have the experience, the gravitas and, by implication, the brains to run U.S. foreign policy?If not, said Mr. Gore, one can only assume that ''the gaps in Governor Bush's foreign policy views and experience will be filled by the ideologies and inveterate antipathies of his party -- the right-wing, partisan isolationism of the Republican Congressional leadership.''Now this is a legitimate question. Mr. Bush has no experience in foreign policy, the well-displayed gaps in his knowledge suggest he may not have even read the newspaper much, and this could make him easy prey for the foreign policy ideologues in his party.But in raising this question Mr. Gore, inadvertently, raises a question about himself -- a question that many people who respect him have been asking. If you talk to Al Gore about geopolitics, the Internet or the global economy, you leave feeling he really does get it. But what good are brains if you don't always act on them? Mr. Bush may not have the brains to always do the right thing, but does Mr. Gore have the spine?Most of Mr. Gore's speech was a serious appeal for an activist, internationalist U.S. foreign policy -- something that, in fairness, Mr. Bush would also pursue. So what was legitimate in Mr. Gore's critique of Mr. Bush? It's the charge that the internationalism Mr. Bush offers often sounds like a we-will-do-whatever-we-want-because-we're-the-only-superpower-and-I-am-not-a-wimp-like-Clinton set of policies, which, if adopted at once, could be destabilizing and would have virtually no allied support. The best thing you can say is that Mr. Bush doesn't really mean some of this stuff. But what if he does?What if he really is ready to unilaterally ''withdraw'' from the ABM treaty, if the Russians won't change it, and destroy the whole fabric of arms control? What if he really is ready to plunk down billions to build a dubious missile defense system against a dubious threat? What if he really is ready to launch a war to ''take out'' Saddam Hussein? What if he really is ready to expand NATO to the Russian border?If it were his father, the former president, you know that he would do the prudent thing. But we don't know that with George W., and when you look at his own party's willingness to be led around by the fringe views of Jesse Helms, well, Mr. Gore is right to ask: Is George W. his father's son or his advisers' captive?But as for Mr. Gore, in his speech he called for a foreign policy of ''forward engagement'' -- addressing problems early before they become a crisis and doing so ''as close to the source of the problem as possible.'' Well, I can think of no problem more in need of such forward engagement than the U.S. embargo of Fidel Castro's Cuba, which has failed for 40 years to oust the Cuban dictator and, if continued, is only going to ensure that when Castro dies the Cuban economy collapses, civil war breaks out and thousands of Cubans sail for Miami. Fixing that policy means engaging the hard-line Miami Cubans, who want no change in policy, but as Mr. Gore showed in the Elian case, that sort of tough love is not his thing.Elian was not a one-day story. It was one of those moments when you get to see everyone's character: Attorney General Janet Reno stood her ground. Mr. Bush said what his advisers told him to say. And Mr. Gore tried to both exploit the Elian saga for political advantage and hide from it.In his speech, Mr. Gore decried ''protectionism and isolationism,'' but when union-led demonstrators were disrupting the World Trade Organization meetings in Seattle in the name of more protectionism, Mr. Gore was silent. What good is it to be for things in principle if you won't take them on in practice? I know Mr. Gore has cast tough votes before. I know he has to get elected. But the growing trend in the Clinton years was that the campaign never ends. This administration has not given a Sister Souljah speech to anyone in a long, long time.That's why the best you can say today about Governor Bush on foreign policy is that he doesn't really mean it, and won't do the wrong thing. He'll wise up. And the best you can say about Al Gore is that he really does mean it and will do the right thing. He'll stand up. But both still have something to prove.
THE STATESBUSH VOWS FIGHT IN CALIFORNIA -- On the second of what will amount to at least four swings through California this spring, Gov. George W. Bush insisted yesterday that he was determined to fight for the state's 54 electoral votes and would not repeat the actions of the last two Republican presidential nominees, who made an early show of interest in California and then effectively ceded it toward the end of the campaign. ''I intend to campaign all the way through November here,'' Mr. Bush said in Mission Viejo, where he visited a charter school. Although Mr. Bush rarely edges up to anything resembling a criticism of his father, former President George Bush, who lost his re-election bid in 1992, the Texas governor said on Wednesday that one reason Republicans had hit hard times in California was that the party's presidential nominees in 1992 and 1996 had abandoned any hope of winning the state.Frank Bruni (NYT)THE STATESBUSH VOWS FIGHT IN CALIFORNIA -- On the second of what will amount to at least four swings through California this spring, Gov. George W. Bush insisted yesterday that he was determined to fight for the state's 54 electoral votes and would not repeat the actions of the last two Republican presidential nominees, who made an early show of interest in California and then effectively ceded it toward the end of the campaign. ''I intend to campaign all the way through November here,'' Mr. Bush said in Mission Viejo, where he visited a charter school. Although Mr. Bush rarely edges up to anything resembling a criticism of his father, former President George Bush, who lost his re-election bid in 1992, the Texas governor said on Wednesday that one reason Republicans had hit hard times in California was that the party's presidential nominees in 1992 and 1996 had abandoned any hope of winning the state.Frank Bruni (NYT)THE REPUBLICANSREAD MY LIPS: NO SMIRK -- California was not the only place where Gov. George W. Bush discussed his father's presidential campaigns. In an ABC News interview to be broadcast today, he says his father seriously undermined his credibility by breaking the ''read my lips, no new taxes'' pledge that had helped him win the White House in 1988. The Texas governor, who himself has taken a no-new-taxes pledge, says the switch helped lead to his father's defeat by Bill Clinton. As for President Clinton, Mr. Bush sharply criticizes his affair with Monica S. Lewinsky. ''He and Mrs. Clinton have done a great job with their daughter, no question about it,'' Mr. Bush says. ''But Bill Clinton, unfortunately, in the last chapter of the 20th century, embarrassed our nation.''  Mr. Bush gave Vice President Al Gore credit for being ''a loving husband and a good dad.'' But he says he is ''a little worried about a man who tends to stretch the truth in order to get ahead politically.''  And what of criticism of himself, especially the charge that he wears a habitual smirk? ''I find a great irony in life and I find humor,'' he replies. ''And I find it amazing that people would spend time analyzing whether I was smiling or not, as opposed to what my views are on education or keeping the economy strong or cutting taxes.''(NYT)THE HOUSEDETERMINED TO STAY -- Representative George Nethercutt of Washington, who has been attacked repeatedly in advertisements run by the U. S. Term Limits group because he broke a pledge to serve only three terms, is countering with an advertisement aimed at the head of Term Limits, Paul Jacob. It begins by noting that Mr. Jacob is a convicted felon who served time in 1980 for draft evasion, asserts that Mr. Jacob's group is financed by rich ''secret donors'' and concludes: ''So when you see the next U. S. Term Limits ad, recognize it for what it is -- lies from convicted felons.'' In 1994, Mr. Nethercutt, a Republican, upset Speaker Tom Foley and became a hero of the term limits movement with a promise that, if elected, he would serve only six years. He faces no major Democratic opponent thus far as he seeks a fourth term, but he said on Monday that he needed his advertisements to ''fight fire with fire.''' The U.S. Term Limits response was a new advertisement stating, ''Nethercutt will say or do anything just to stay in power.''B. Drummond Ayres Jr. (NYT)
INTERNATIONALA3-16House Votes to Expand Africa and Caribbean Trade  The House voted, 309 to 110, to grant more than 70 African and Caribbean countries broad new trading privileges by expanding duty-free access to American markets.A1More Hostages in Sierra Leone  The number of United Nations peacekeepers held hostage by rebels rose to at least 92 in the West African country of Sierra Leone, where a tense calm followed four days of escalating clashes between the peacekeepers and insurgent fighters.A14Congo to Allow U.N. Forces  President Laurent Kabila watched as his foreign minister signed an agreement with the United Nations that the president had long resisted, one that opens the way for an international peacekeeping force for Congo. The Central African country has been embroiled in a war with half a dozen nations that has pitted Mr. Kabila's government against rebels backed by Uganda and Rwanda.A14Maverick Elected in London  Londoners chose a maverick populist, Ken Livingstone, as their city's first elected mayor. Mr. Livingstone, who was ousted from the Labor Party, succeeded despite government efforts to block his candidacy.A16Lockerbie Residents Testify  Residents of the Scottish village took the stand in the trial of two Libyans accused of blowing up Pan Am Flight 103 in 1988 and described a hellish scene; 11 of the 270 people killed were on the ground in Lockerbie.A3Fighting Along Lebanon Border  Attacks and retaliatory attacks over three days involving Israeli forces, their South Lebanese militia allies and Hezbollah guerrillas left one Israeli soldier dead and another wounded and at least two Lebanese women dead and several Lebanese civilians wounded.A8Sri Lanka Tightens Press Laws  The government, responding to a series of losses to Tamil rebels, authorized the confiscation of private property, the shutting of newspapers and bans on public meetings, strikes and criticism of the president, when deemed necessary for security.A13World BriefingA6NATIONALA18-24Court Finds Disputed Flag Is Not Official, After All  The Mississippi Supreme Court said an overlooked legal technicality had left the state without any official flag since 1906. Several black legislators, who oppose the current flag's incorporation of a Confederate design, pressed for creation of a commission to select a new flag. Some white lawmakers urged the Legislature to formally adopt the current flag.A1District Protest Effort Gains  Mayor Anthony A. Williams endorsed a grass roots movement to imprint ''Taxation Without Representation'' on District of Columbia license plates, to protest the fact that city residents pay $2 billion in annual federal taxes but have yet to obtain voting rights in Congress.A23Death Penalty to Be Sought  Prosecutors in Atlanta said they would seek the death penalty for Jamil Abdullah Al-Amin, the Muslim cleric formerly known as H. Rap Brown, who is charged with murdering a sheriff's deputy in March.A18Vieques Protesters Removed  Federal agents peacefully took about 200 protesters from a naval bombing range on the Puerto Rican island. The protesters, who included two members of Congress, want the Navy to end bombing exercises and leave the island. None of the demonstrators were charged.A18Lessening Air Bags' Force  The government is expected to announce new standards for automobile air bags today, allowing less powerful bags that would reduce the risk to children and small adults.A182 Democrats Fault a Gore Plan  Two Democratic senators, Daniel Patrick Moynihan of New York and Bob Kerrey of Nebraska, criticized Vice President Al Gore's approach to Social Security, saying his plan would make the system dependent on general tax revenue.A22SCIENCE/HEALTHWarning on Breast Cancer Drug  Genentech notified doctors that the breast cancer drug Herceptin had been linked to 15 deaths and 47 other adverse reactions in patients.A24NEW YORK/REGIONB1-12Vatican Offers No Sign Of Cardinal's Successor  There were few clues as to whom Pope John Paul II would name to succeed Cardinal John O'Connor as archbishop. Church officials in the United States said the successor had been chosen but no announcement should be expected until after the funeral. A Vatican official said the pope was given a final list of recommendations after a Feb. 24 meeting of the Congregation of Bishops.A1On the first of five solemn days leading to a funeral on Monday, church officials scheduled daily Masses and public viewings of the cardinal's body at St. Patrick's Cathedral.B8Sentenced for Subway Killing  Andrew Goldstein was sentenced to 25 years to life in prison for the murder Kendra Webdale, whom he pushed in front of a subway train in January 1999. Mr. Goldstein, 30, who has schizophrenia, blamed the attack on a ''psychotic incident.''B1SPORTSD1-8OBITUARIESA24-25EDUCATIONChanging a Vote for Chancellor  Irving S. Hamer Jr., the Manhattan member of the city's Board of Education, made a bid to be named chancellor. In so doing, Dr. Hamer removed the majority vote -- his own -- for Harold O. Levy, the interim chancellor, and paralyzed a process that had seemed destined to result in Mr. Levy's selection.A1Putting Schools to the Test  The New York State Board of Regents voted to publicly grade every school in the state based on scores on the new statewide tests, rewarding or punishing schools according to where they rank.B1Praise for Charter Schools  President Clinton lauded charter schools on a visit to the first in the nation, in St. Paul, but criticized some state laws governing the independent public schools.A24BUSINESS DAYC1-22E-Mail Attack Program  A rogue software program, borne by an e-mail message proclaiming ''I love you,'' propelled itself around the world, jamming and crashing e-mail systems and destroying data on hundreds of thousands of computers. Thousands of corporations responded by disconnecting their computer systems from the Internet.A1Limit-Order Rules Ignored  An S.E.C. report said brokerage firms flout rules intended to ensure that investors receive the best possible prices on their trades.C1AOL-Time Warner Blueprint  America Online and Time Warner said their merged company would separate the creation of content, like music, books and movies, from the distribution of content over broadcast networks, cable television systems and the Internet.C1Business DigestC1WEEKENDE1-34; E35-50Taking On Otello  A number of opera stars, including the Three Tenors, came to Carnegie Hall on Wednesday to hear the 76-year-old tenor Carlo Bergonzi sing Otello, the one Verdi role that had eluded him during his long career.E5EDITORIALA26-27Editorials: Time Warner's power play; the lessons of Sierra Leone; New York's vanishing libraries.  Columns: Gail Collins, Thomas L. Friedman.CrosswordE48  TV ListingsE33  Public LivesB2  WeatherD8INTERNATIONALA3-16House Votes to Expand Africa and Caribbean Trade  The House voted, 309 to 110, to grant more than 70 African and Caribbean countries broad new trading privileges by expanding duty-free access to American markets.A1More Hostages in Sierra Leone  The number of United Nations peacekeepers held hostage by rebels rose to at least 92 in the West African country of Sierra Leone, where a tense calm followed four days of escalating clashes between the peacekeepers and insurgent fighters.A14Congo to Allow U.N. Forces  President Laurent Kabila watched as his foreign minister signed an agreement with the United Nations that the president had long resisted, one that opens the way for an international peacekeeping force for Congo. The Central African country has been embroiled in a war with half a dozen nations that has pitted Mr. Kabila's government against rebels backed by Uganda and Rwanda.A14Maverick Elected in London  Londoners chose a maverick populist, Ken Livingstone, as their city's first elected mayor. Mr. Livingstone, who was ousted from the Labor Party, succeeded despite government efforts to block his candidacy.A16Lockerbie Residents Testify  Residents of the Scottish village took the stand in the trial of two Libyans accused of blowing up Pan Am Flight 103 in 1988 and described a hellish scene; 11 of the 270 people killed were on the ground in Lockerbie.A3Fighting Along Lebanon Border  Attacks and retaliatory attacks over three days involving Israeli forces, their South Lebanese militia allies and Hezbollah guerrillas left one Israeli soldier dead and another wounded and at least two Lebanese women dead and several Lebanese civilians wounded.A8Sri Lanka Tightens Press Laws  The government, responding to a series of losses to Tamil rebels, authorized the confiscation of private property, the shutting of newspapers and bans on public meetings, strikes and criticism of the president, when deemed necessary for security.A13World BriefingA6NATIONALA18-24Court Finds Disputed Flag Is Not Official, After All  The Mississippi Supreme Court said an overlooked legal technicality had left the state without any official flag since 1906. Several black legislators, who oppose the current flag's incorporation of a Confederate design, pressed for creation of a commission to select a new flag. Some white lawmakers urged the Legislature to formally adopt the current flag.A1District Protest Effort Gains  Mayor Anthony A. Williams endorsed a grass roots movement to imprint ''Taxation Without Representation'' on District of Columbia license plates, to protest the fact that city residents pay $2 billion in annual federal taxes but have yet to obtain voting rights in Congress.A23Death Penalty to Be Sought  Prosecutors in Atlanta said they would seek the death penalty for Jamil Abdullah Al-Amin, the Muslim cleric formerly known as H. Rap Brown, who is charged with murdering a sheriff's deputy in March.A18Vieques Protesters Removed  Federal agents peacefully took about 200 protesters from a naval bombing range on the Puerto Rican island. The protesters, who included two members of Congress, want the Navy to end bombing exercises and leave the island. None of the demonstrators were charged.A18Lessening Air Bags' Force  The government is expected to announce new standards for automobile air bags today, allowing less powerful bags that would reduce the risk to children and small adults.A182 Democrats Fault a Gore Plan  Two Democratic senators, Daniel Patrick Moynihan of New York and Bob Kerrey of Nebraska, criticized Vice President Al Gore's approach to Social Security, saying his plan would make the system dependent on general tax revenue.A22SCIENCE/HEALTHWarning on Breast Cancer Drug  Genentech notified doctors that the breast cancer drug Herceptin had been linked to 15 deaths and 47 other adverse reactions in patients.A24NEW YORK/REGIONB1-12Vatican Offers No Sign Of Cardinal's Successor  There were few clues as to whom Pope John Paul II would name to succeed Cardinal John O'Connor as archbishop. Church officials in the United States said the successor had been chosen but no announcement should be expected until after the funeral. A Vatican official said the pope was given a final list of recommendations after a Feb. 24 meeting of the Congregation of Bishops.A1On the first of five solemn days leading to a funeral on Monday, church officials scheduled daily Masses and public viewings of the cardinal's body at St. Patrick's Cathedral.B8Sentenced for Subway Killing  Andrew Goldstein was sentenced to 25 years to life in prison for the murder Kendra Webdale, whom he pushed in front of a subway train in January 1999. Mr. Goldstein, 30, who has schizophrenia, blamed the attack on a ''psychotic incident.''B1SPORTSD1-8OBITUARIESA24-25EDUCATIONChanging a Vote for Chancellor  Irving S. Hamer Jr., the Manhattan member of the city's Board of Education, made a bid to be named chancellor. In so doing, Dr. Hamer removed the majority vote -- his own -- for Harold O. Levy, the interim chancellor, and paralyzed a process that had seemed destined to result in Mr. Levy's selection.A1Putting Schools to the Test  The New York State Board of Regents voted to publicly grade every school in the state based on scores on the new statewide tests, rewarding or punishing schools according to where they rank.B1Praise for Charter Schools  President Clinton lauded charter schools on a visit to the first in the nation, in St. Paul, but criticized some state laws governing the independent public schools.A24BUSINESS DAYC1-22E-Mail Attack Program  A rogue software program, borne by an e-mail message proclaiming ''I love you,'' propelled itself around the world, jamming and crashing e-mail systems and destroying data on hundreds of thousands of computers. Thousands of corporations responded by disconnecting their computer systems from the Internet.A1Limit-Order Rules Ignored  An S.E.C. report said brokerage firms flout rules intended to ensure that investors receive the best possible prices on their trades.C1AOL-Time Warner Blueprint  America Online and Time Warner said their merged company would separate the creation of content, like music, books and movies, from the distribution of content over broadcast networks, cable television systems and the Internet.C1Business DigestC1WEEKENDE1-34; E35-50Taking On Otello  A number of opera stars, including the Three Tenors, came to Carnegie Hall on Wednesday to hear the 76-year-old tenor Carlo Bergonzi sing Otello, the one Verdi role that had eluded him during his long career.E5EDITORIALA26-27Editorials: Time Warner's power play; the lessons of Sierra Leone; New York's vanishing libraries.  Columns: Gail Collins, Thomas L. Friedman.CrosswordE48  TV ListingsE33  Public LivesB2  WeatherD8
It has become the daily tit for tat of the presidential contest. Vice President Al Gore calls Gov. George W. Bush reckless, irresponsible, profligate or arrogant. And Mr. Bush calmly replies that the vice president is like an addict when it comes to distorting the truth.If this kind of acrid exchange seems vaguely familiar, there is good reason: During the Democratic primary campaign, Mr. Gore relentlessly attacked the proposals of former Senator Bill Bradley as risky and expensive. And Mr. Bradley calmly replied that the vice president was addicted to distorting the truth.It has become the daily tit for tat of the presidential contest. Vice President Al Gore calls Gov. George W. Bush reckless, irresponsible, profligate or arrogant. And Mr. Bush calmly replies that the vice president is like an addict when it comes to distorting the truth.If this kind of acrid exchange seems vaguely familiar, there is good reason: During the Democratic primary campaign, Mr. Gore relentlessly attacked the proposals of former Senator Bill Bradley as risky and expensive. And Mr. Bradley calmly replied that the vice president was addicted to distorting the truth.Mr. Gore's harshly aggressive strategy worked just fine in the primaries, where Democratic voters who had initially seemed interested in Mr. Bradley abandoned him in droves. But the vice president is now engaged in a very different race against a very different opponent, who is considered quite adept at thrust-and-parry politics, and the question is, Can it work again?Many people have their doubts. Though it may seem logical for Mr. Gore to try to bathe his less well known opponent in a negative light, the strategy carries clear risks, say independent analysts and some Democrats as well.For one thing, Mr. Gore is now playing to an audience very different from that of the primary campaign. Back then he was talking to largely sympathetic crowds of Democrats. Now he must court swing voters who are likely to be more skeptical of his credibility and less accepting of his attacks on Mr. Bush. Taken too far, the attacks could make him appear unpleasant, overly partisan, mean-spirited and untrustworthy to the very independent and crossover voters he is courting.Even some Democrats seem to think that Mr. Gore's attacks occasionally go over the top. On Wednesday, Mr. Gore accused Mr. Bush of devising a ''secret'' Social Security ''privatization'' plan that would bankrupt the system. Today Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan, a New York Democrat who supports investing some of the Social Security trust fund in private markets, took issue with the word ''privatization.''''That's a scare word,'' said Mr. Moynihan, who supported Mr. Bradley in the primaries but has since endorsed the vice president.Another danger for Mr. Gore is that voters will perceive his criticisms of Mr. Bush as personal. Mr. Gore's aides argue that his attacks are aimed solely at Mr. Bush's record and proposals. (Today alone, the vice president blasted Mr. Bush's positions on the census, managed care and gun control.)But the adjectives the vice president has used in describing Mr. Bush's policies -- ''reckless,'' ''risky,'' ''irresponsible,'' ''smug,'' ''arrogant,'' ''noticeably blank'' -- also seem intended to raise questions about the governor's character, intellect and competence, many analysts say.They note that Mr. Gore used similarly loaded words against Mr. Bradley, suggesting that he was an aloof elitist who viewed politics as ''an intellectual exercise.'' The Gore campaign seems to be trying to exploit the opposite with Mr. Bush, who, unlike Mr. Bradley, a Rhodes scholar, is viewed by his critics as lacking intellectual depth on complex issues, particularly foreign affairs.Mr. Gore said today that he was not particularly worried that he  might be creating negative impressions among voters.''Political analysis is not my forte,'' he said, though adding, ''I do think that in a democracy, vigorous discussion of substantive issues is healthy.''And he defended his recent use of the words ''smug'' and ''arrogant,'' turning away a suggestion that they had been meant to convey something about Mr. Bush's character.''They're a commentary on the assumption that is at the heart of his campaign: that you as journalists and the American people as voters are not entitled to know the details of his private secret plan to privatize Social Security,'' Mr. Gore said.Democratic strategists argue that Mr. Gore may have little choice but to attack so vigorously and so early in the campaign, as he did against Mr. Bradley. For one thing, he is trailing Mr. Bush, although by small margins, in most polls, including those in customarily Democratic states like Washington and West Virginia. And because he is so well known, many voters already hold relatively fixed opinions of him, as many bad as good, most polls show.In contrast, Mr. Bush, despite his famous name, remains something of a mystery to voters outside Texas. So Mr. Gore, the reasoning goes, needs to define his rival as a risky, out-of-the-mainstream alternative. That was the very strategy that Mr. Bush's father, also a two-term vice president at the time, used with  great success 12 years ago against another governor running for president, Michael S. Dukakis of Massachusetts.''If you become viewed as a risk, as Michael Dukakis was in 1988, it is a very tough road to get back from,'' said Susan Estrich, who managed Mr. Dukakis's campaign. ''If Al Gore can raise questions about Bush, Bush may never get off the ground. So Gore will just keep doing it.''But Ms. Estrich praised Mr. Bush's ability to roll with Mr. Gore's punches and, in the process, make him seem like a negative politician. ''It seems to be working,'' she said of the governor's approach. ''He's up.''In adopting Mr. Bradley's strategy of calling Mr. Gore dishonest, Bush aides have also appropriated one of Mr. Bradley's sharpest debate lines, which they often strip across news releases: ''Why should we believe you would tell the truth as president if you don't tell the truth as a candidate?''But Mr. Bush is also a candidate far different from Mr. Bradley, with a campaign quicker in its responses to the vice president's blasts. On Tuesday, for instance, Mr. Gore asserted that criminal recidivism rates in Texas had increased significantly during the Bush administration; within hours, Mr. Bush's press office had issued its own statistics rebutting the charge. Mr. Bradley's campaign sometimes let days go by before responding to attacks.And on Wednesday, after Mr. Gore's Social Security attack, Mr. Bush spent much of a flight to California giving reporters a spirited, point-by-point response to many of Mr. Gore's recent accusations.That high-altitude news conference underscored what many Republicans say are Mr. Bush's greatest  strengths as a campaigner: his sunny persona, his humor and his ability to cloak tart retorts in genial language. Those traits, Republicans say, make Mr. Gore seem all the more stiff and mean-spirited by comparison.''By going into attack mode so early, and by repeating this mantra that everything Bush proposes is a risky scheme, Al Gore plays into George Bush's hands on the personality comparison,'' said Q. Whitfield Ayres, a Republican pollster. ''George Bush comes across in that case as a likable, decent guy, and Al Gore comes across as a whining, yapping little dog.''Yet there is a certain logic, some analysts say, to Mr. Gore's efforts at harshly undermining Mr. Bush, and doing so sooner rather than later.''Gore didn't stop Bradley's forward momentum overnight,'' said Andrew Kohut, director of the nonpartisan Pew Research Center for the People and the Press. ''You have to lay the groundwork.''But this is an art, not a science. What is too much or too early is hard to say. There is no slide rule.''''Some Strong Words About Bush''In recent weeks Vice President Al Gore has used a variety of derisive words, including ''risky,'' ''irresponsible,'' ''smug'' and ''reckless,'' to characterize the proposals of Gov. George W. Bush. Here is a sampling.MARCH 16 -- ''Governor Bush's tax scheme is so risky, so reckless, that just yesterday the Republican-controlled House of Representatives, given an opportunity to vote for it, turned it down, turned the other way, said, 'We don't want to even cast a vote on that thing.' ''APRIL 25 -- ''We fell prey to the politics of illusion during the decade of amazing deficits. Now we have to avoid the politics of illusion in the decade of amazing surpluses. This is a test of our memory. Have we forgotten the dangers of irresponsibility? Have we forgotten the virtues of responsibility?''APRIL 30 -- ''Just this past week, Governor Bush used his brief meeting with Russian Foreign Minister Ivanov to issue a warning that his intention would be to build and deploy a global Star Wars system that he believes could defend the U.S. and all our allies against any missile launch from any source. In the 1990's, most serious analysts took a look at the implausibility of this endeavor, the fantastical price that our taxpayers would be expected to pay and the dangerously destabilizing consequences of traveling down that path and rejected this notion. Governor Bush wishes to return to it, and chose the worst possible venue in which to launch, for lack of a better phrase, his risky foreign policy scheme.''MAY 3 -- ''What about the waitress who's carrying a heavy tray, what about the longshoreman, what about the steelworker and the auto workers? When they get to the current retirement age, they don't want to be told that in order to finance some risky tax scheme for the wealthy, they are going to have to keep on working until they are 70 years old.''MAY 3 -- ''How does the Bush plan propose to deal with the bankruptcy of Social Security that his privatization scheme would cause? He doesn't even bother to provide an answer. He just smiles and goes on with the smug assumption that there's no need to share with you the details of what he wants to do.''THE 2000 CAMPAIGN: NEWS ANALYSIS
Vice President Al Gore continued his intensive assault against Gov. George W. Bush's policies today, saying his Republican rival had been inordinately influenced by the National Rifle Association and had proposed an inadequate health care plan that ''offers too little for too few at the expense of too many.''But when asked later by reporters about Mr. Bush's comments that Mr. Gore's attacks were having a corrosive influence on the political process, Mr. Gore refused to respond directly, saying the nation deserved a vigorous debate on the issues.Vice President Al Gore continued his intensive assault against Gov. George W. Bush's policies today, saying his Republican rival had been inordinately influenced by the National Rifle Association and had proposed an inadequate health care plan that ''offers too little for too few at the expense of too many.''But when asked later by reporters about Mr. Bush's comments that Mr. Gore's attacks were having a corrosive influence on the political process, Mr. Gore refused to respond directly, saying the nation deserved a vigorous debate on the issues.Mr. Gore had intended to deliver a health care speech here, since he was addressing the inaugural meeting of the Association of Health Care Journalists, at Northwestern University Memorial Hospital.But his aides said he had been captivated by reports in the morning newspapers that suggested that the gun lobby was thrilled at the prospect of a Bush presidency, and Mr. Gore rewrote his speech as he flew here this morning from Washington to draw attention to those reports.The New York Times reported that gun manufacturers had broken off settlement talks with 31 cities and counties in hopes that a Bush administration would be more sympathetic than the Clinton administration has been. And The Washington Post reported that Kayne Robinson, first vice president of the N.R.A., had said in a speech to members in February that if Mr. Bush was elected, the gun lobby would expect to have ''a president where we work out of their office.''Handgun Control Inc., a lobbying group, began running a 30-second television commercial today that uses videotape of the speech and attacks Mr. Bush as a pawn of the National Rifle Association.In his speech, Mr. Gore said, ''Governor Bush has convinced the N.R.A. that he wants to take the gun lobbyists out of the lobby and put them right into the Oval Office.''He added in a biting aside, ''Maybe he would pick Charlton Heston as the next surgeon general.''Mr. Gore's point was that gun violence, apart from killing people, was straining the nation's health care system, to the tune of $2.3 billion annually, according to the Journal of the American Medical Association, and that Mr. Bush was so deeply in the pocket of the gun lobby that he could not recognize this problem.Mr. Bush dismissed those accusations. ''I make my positions on what I think is right,'' he said at a news conference in Orange County, Calif. ''If this is an attempt by my opponent to frighten people, I'm not going to let that happen.''Asked about Mr. Robinson's speech, Mr. Bush said: ''I don't want to disappoint the man, but I'll be setting up shop in the White House. It'll be my office. I'll make the decision as to what goes on in the White House.''Repeating an accusation he has made before, Mr. Bush said: ''I want to say something: I've never been a member of the N.R.A. I think Al Gore's been a member of the N.R.A., if I'm not mistaken.''This accusation momentarily befuddled both campaigns, neither of which could find evidence that Mr. Gore had belonged to the gun lobby. Scott McClellan, a spokesman for Mr. Bush, said the governor might have been referring to a Time magazine article this year that quoted an N.R.A. official as saying Mr. Gore, who represented rural Tennessee in Congress, had once been so opposed to gun control that he could have been the poster boy for it.Mr. McClellan said of Mr. Gore, ''I guess he never got around to paying his dues.''Asked whether Mr. Bush had misspoken, Mr. McClellan said, ''I'll leave it at that.''Chris Lehane, a spokesman for Mr. Gore, said: ''The campaign has no record of Al Gore being a member of the N.R.A.''Gore aides said Mr. Gore might have inadvertently become a member through a magazine subscription or some other organization.''The burden of proof is on Bush,'' Mr. Lehane said. ''He ought to be held to the same standards on distortions that you guys are holding the Gore campaign to.''But the day's back and forth seemed less about gun control than about each candidate wanting to paint his opponent with as broad and black a brush as possible.Mr. Bush again said Mr. Gore was distorting his record and ''saying things that simply are not true.''''It's amazing that a person running for president of the United States would look people in the eye and say I've never submitted budgets as governor and continue to say so when I did,'' Mr. Bush said.At a news conference, Mr. Gore declined to respond to Mr. Bush's accusations that he was not being factual. But the vice president, who has said Mr. Bush has never put together a real budget, brought that up again. He said he happened to have in his pocket what he said was a copy of Mr. Bush's 1995 budget. He handed it to a reporter, saying, ''If you think that's a budget, then maybe I can convince you it's a duck.''The three-page statement contained 12 paragraphs of a general nature and no specific figures.THE 2000 CAMPAIGN: THE VICE PRESIDENT
President Clinton today heaped praise on charter schools on a visit to the first one founded in the nation, but criticized some state laws governing the independent public schools as too strict or too lax.Mr. Clinton addressed high school students at City Academy here as part of a two-day tour of public schools in Kentucky, Iowa, Minnesota and Ohio, in which he is pushing his own education proposals and those of Vice President Al Gore, the likely Democratic presidential candidate.President Clinton today heaped praise on charter schools on a visit to the first one founded in the nation, but criticized some state laws governing the independent public schools as too strict or too lax.Mr. Clinton addressed high school students at City Academy here as part of a two-day tour of public schools in Kentucky, Iowa, Minnesota and Ohio, in which he is pushing his own education proposals and those of Vice President Al Gore, the likely Democratic presidential candidate.Democrats and teachers' unions have embraced charter schools -- publicly financed schools that operate largely free of state and local regulations and unions -- as a palatable alternative to voucher programs, which are favored by Republicans. Throughout his presidency, Mr. Clinton has said that vouchers unfairly drain resources from struggling public schools.''We now have enough evidence that the charter school movement works, if it's done right,'' he told an audience of several hundred students, teachers and community members gathered in the school gymnasium. ''Very often we see charter schools provide an even greater atmosphere of competition that induces kids to work harder and harder to learn.''Critics of the concept of charter schools note that many of them have struggled financially while others have been shut down for failing to provide proper buildings, adequately trained teachers or sufficiently rigorous curriculums.Mr. Clinton stressed today that those schools are the exception to the rule and pointed to City Academy as an example of how charter schools should work.The school, housed in a recreation center in a working-class neighborhood, opened in 1992, the year Mr. Clinton was elected to the presidency. City Academy now has 100 students, most of whom are poor and members of minorities, and 90 percent go on to college.Today, Mr. Clinton released $137 million in start-up grants for charter schools, many of which depend on three-year federal grants as seed money to buy buildings.He praised Minnesota's charter school law as a model for other states to emulate, saying it held charter schools accountable while giving them the flexibility to serve students from many different backgrounds and with many different learning styles.''You basically have struck the right balance,'' he said. ''You have encouraged the growth of charter schools, but you do hold charter schools responsible for results. That's what every state in this country ought to do.''Some states, Mr. Clinton acknowledged, have not kept a close enough watch over charter schools. Others, he said, have not given the schools the freedom they need to succeed. Many strict laws are the result of pressure from teachers' unions, which want to control who the schools can hire and how much their teachers work.''Some states have laws that are so loose that no matter whether the charter schools are doing their job or not, they just get to stay open and they become like another bureaucracy,'' Mr. Clinton said. ''Even worse, some states have laws that are so restrictive it's almost impossible to open a charter school in the first place.''But Mr. Clinton said that overall, charter schools have the kind of accountability measures that he wants all public schools to be held to.Both Mr. Clinton and Mr. Gore have been pushing plans that would punish schools that are given more money but continue to fail, in response to Republican criticism that they have poured more and more money into education programs without insisting on results.''We should build the level of accountability you find here in the charter school system into all the schools in our system,'' Mr. Clinton said.
Pushing further in its drive for accountability and tougher standards, the New York State Board of Regents voted yesterday to publicly grade every school in the state based on scores on the new statewide tests, rewarding or punishing schools according to where they rank.In another significant departure, the grades would tease out the scores of black, Hispanic, non-English speaking and special education students in each school, to distinguish gaps between their performance and that of white students. By doing so, the grades will potentially expose weaknesses in better-off districts where the average grades have sometimes masked low achievement by students from those groups.Pushing further in its drive for accountability and tougher standards, the New York State Board of Regents voted yesterday to publicly grade every school in the state based on scores on the new statewide tests, rewarding or punishing schools according to where they rank.In another significant departure, the grades would tease out the scores of black, Hispanic, non-English speaking and special education students in each school, to distinguish gaps between their performance and that of white students. By doing so, the grades will potentially expose weaknesses in better-off districts where the average grades have sometimes masked low achievement by students from those groups.With the Regents' vote, New York joins Texas and California in considering racial data in the rankings and 26 other states that have imposed some form of grading on their schools. In large part, the grades are a way of publicly shaming schools into improvement, or enticing them, as Kentucky and South Carolina do, with cash rewards.Although the state has previously branded the worst schools, the new system, to begin with next year's test scores, will be the state's first to rank schools that do not fail. The message, officials say, is that simply passing is no longer the only goal and that serving only middle-class white students well is no longer good enough.''When you get beyond the averages and see how minority students and non-English-language learners and other students are performing, you get to the heart of the matter,'' said Richard P. Mills, the state's education commissioner. ''To be called a good school, a school needs to work for all students.''Schools will initially be graded on three levels: meeting standards, below standards and farthest from standards. The last category will essentially be the same as the only grade now used: schools under registration review, or SURR. The new system will also recognize ''rapidly improving'' schools that make strong gains over several years of the tests. Within the next year, the state expects to add at least one higher category for schools that exceed standards.But the grades have also been used for more drastic measures. Florida legislators voted to give private-school vouchers to students at schools that receive F's for two years out of four. the state is appealing a court decision that ruled the vouchers, but not the grading, unconstitutional. In a speech outlining his presidential campaign pledges on education, Gov. George W. Bush of Texas proposed grading all schools and stripping some federal financing from those that received low grades for three years.New York schools superintendents worry that the scores will be used by real estate brokers and parents to measure the merits of one community over another.Advocates for minority children applauded the Regents' decision to disaggregate data, or separate the scores of blacks, Hispanics and other groups that have traditionally scored low on tests. Districts where those groups are a minority, especially suburban districts, have tended to score well even though minority students may score at the lowest levels. Separating the data will expose the so-called achievement gap, in which black and Hispanic students score far worse than white students whose parents have the same education level and income.''The problem with data based on averages is that it masks the gaps, it allows schools that are not serving kids of color well to skate by on the achievement of affluent kids and white kids,'' said Amy Wilkins, a policy analyst with the Education Trust, a group in Washington that advocates higher standards in schools with poor and minority children.For elementary and middle school students, the state will phase in the rankings based on the scores from the mathematics and English tests for fourth and eighth graders in the 2000-2001 school year. The Regents will assign a grade to each school depending on what percentage of students reach Level 2 or Level 3 on each test. (Tests are scored from Level 1 to Level 4, the highest.)But the board has yet to determine the percentage of students who have to be in each level for a school to earn a certain ranking.Each year, the commissioner will set goals for each ranking, so schools will have to continue to improve to consistently earn high rankings.''We are adopting this new accountability system in order to encourage improvement and recognize achievement,'' Carl T. Hayden, the Regents chancellor, said.High schools will earn their grades based on the percentage of students graduating, that is, having achieved all course credits and passed the five required Regents exams. While those requirements are being phased in, high schools will be graded on the statewide English and math exams.After the grades are assigned, Mr. Mills said, the Regents will consider what rewards or penalties to assign to each level. Rewards will most likely mean waiving some regulations for high-performing schools. Punishments will most likely mean schools that are not making progress will have to come up with improvement plans to be approved by the State Department of Education.Some suburban superintendents worried that any form of grading might heighten anxieties in their communities. Michael McGill, superintendent of Scarsdale public schools, asked: ''What happens if you're a parent in a middle-class family and you go to a school which is serving a real diverse group of kids, and where you have some kids performing quite well, but because you're serving a wide range of kids, other kids don't perform well? Your entire district ends up being branded as a poor school.''
Hillary Rodham Clinton finished her tour through each of the state's 62 counties today with a sharp attack on George W. Bush's tax cut proposals, leaving her mostly Republican audience in silence.In the last 10 months, Mrs. Clinton's race for the United States Senate has taken her from the Delaware County farm of Daniel Patrick Moynihan, the retiring senator, to the shore of Lake Champlain in, of all places, Clinton County, which she chose as her last stop. In many towns, Mrs. Clinton has been treated more like a celebrity than a political candidate. Even Republicans who have no intention of voting for Mrs. Clinton have come to get a glimpse of her.Hillary Rodham Clinton finished her tour through each of the state's 62 counties today with a sharp attack on George W. Bush's tax cut proposals, leaving her mostly Republican audience in silence.In the last 10 months, Mrs. Clinton's race for the United States Senate has taken her from the Delaware County farm of Daniel Patrick Moynihan, the retiring senator, to the shore of Lake Champlain in, of all places, Clinton County, which she chose as her last stop. In many towns, Mrs. Clinton has been treated more like a celebrity than a political candidate. Even Republicans who have no intention of voting for Mrs. Clinton have come to get a glimpse of her.In outlining her opposition to Mr. Bush's call for a $1.3 trillion tax cut over 10 years, Mrs. Clinton said his plan would hurt efforts to win more federal money for New York because such broad-based tax reductions would deplete the surplus.''I cannot support Governor Bush's large across-the-board tax cut,'' Mrs. Clinton said. ''I do not think that's right for New York or our country. The last thing we need right now before we can eliminate some of that deficit with Washington is a large across-the-board tax cut.''Mrs. Clinton's audience enthusiastically applauded her speech until she suggested tax cuts smaller than those favored by Mr. Bush, the presumptive Republican presidential candidate. Many in the audience stopped practically in midclap, in apparent disagreement.Even though upstate New York is predominantly Republican territory, it is considered potentially critical for Mrs. Clinton this year because the Senate race is viewed as an extremely close contest.Speaking at Clinton Community College, the first lady gave a localized version of her standard stump speech, pledging to try to improve the border crossing at Champlain and to try to win federal subsidies for natural gas distribution systems, proposals that were both greeted with sustained applause.At a news conference after the speech, Mrs. Clinton said she recognized that her audience might not be receptive to her views on tax cuts. ''I said, 'I know there are a lot of Republicans in the audience,' '' she said. ''I am well aware a lot of Republicans are sorting out where they are on this issue, but I want people in the North Country to know I support targeted tax cuts.''Mrs. Clinton also tried to draw sharp distinctions between herself and her likely Republican opponent, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani of New York.She criticized Mr. Giuliani for stating at a town hall meeting Wednesday that he would vote for Senator Jesse Helms, Republican of North Carolina, to continue as chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee. Mrs. Clinton said Mr. Helms's opposition to the Comprehensive Nuclear Test Ban Treaty and United Nations conventions on women's and children's rights had hurt American foreign policy.
Robert D. Putnam, a political scientist at Harvard University, is a big, red-faced, enthusiastic man with the Amish whiskers and explosive gestures of a 19th-century fundamentalist preacher -- useful characteristics for the ''hell will get us if we don't mend our ways'' thesis that has taken over his life in the last five years.His message, familiar to millions of Americans, is that the civic engagement -- the neighborhood friendships, the dinner parties, the group discussions, the club memberships, the church committees, the political participation; all the involvements, even the street protests, that make a democracy work -- has declined over the last 30 years. Trust and reciprocity, which Mr. Putnam calls social capital, have been damaged, he says, and the nation has grown cantankerous and less efficient.Robert D. Putnam, a political scientist at Harvard University, is a big, red-faced, enthusiastic man with the Amish whiskers and explosive gestures of a 19th-century fundamentalist preacher -- useful characteristics for the ''hell will get us if we don't mend our ways'' thesis that has taken over his life in the last five years.His message, familiar to millions of Americans, is that the civic engagement -- the neighborhood friendships, the dinner parties, the group discussions, the club memberships, the church committees, the political participation; all the involvements, even the street protests, that make a democracy work -- has declined over the last 30 years. Trust and reciprocity, which Mr. Putnam calls social capital, have been damaged, he says, and the nation has grown cantankerous and less efficient.Being a spiritual man, deeply committed to his own findings, he proselytizes. Tapping foundations for funds, Mr. Putnam organizes seminars, surveys ''social connectedness'' in numerous cities (the hope being that local groups will then fix the shortcomings), speaks tirelessly, and generally tries to recreate a modern version of the community bonds that flourished at the turn of the 20th century and again after World War II.''I don't want to say that I am a Jane Addams or a John Dewey, but I aspire to that role,'' Mr. Putnam said, naming two turn-of-the-century social reformers who were both scholars and doers. ''In academia now it has become a less prestigious activity to be concerned about social reforms.''The first time Mr. Putnam put forth his message, in an academic article published five years ago, he caught lots of attention, as much for the title, ''Bowling Alone,'' as for the findings. People bowled more frequently than before, he had learned, but they bowled with their children or with a few friends: basically alone. What had declined were the organized leagues and the lively conversations and social interaction over beer and pizza that the leagues had fostered.''Bowling Alone'' touched a public nerve and became a metaphor for a much larger national malaise. Mr. Putnam suddenly found himself profiled in People magazine. He appeared on talk shows, and President Clinton invited him to Camp David. Most recently both Al Gore and George W. Bush have tapped him for advice, or their aides have.''They know perfectly well, these politicians, that Americans are worried about their communities,'' Mr. Putnam said over lunch recently, putting down his fork to emphasize his point forcefully with both hands. ''They know that if they could come up with some coherent response, there is a market for that politically.''Despite the political appeal, that first paper drew plenty of criticism. His evidence was faulty and too sparse, some said. He failed to appreciate the new forms of civic participation that had emerged in the late 20th century, others argued. There was concern that the decline in church activity, for example, once a big source of civic engagement, might only mean that organized religion no longer spoke to people's needs as did, say, self-help groups like Gamblers Anonymous or Weight Watchers. (These have proliferated.)But now Mr. Putnam, after five more years of research, has reaffirmed his original conclusions and supported them with greatly expanded data, all presented in a new book, ''Bowling Alone: The Collapse and Revival of American Community'' (Simon & Schuster), sent to stores this week. The criticism has not gone away, but critics of Mr. Putnam's concepts who have read galley proofs of the book said that it would almost certainly become the framework for a revived debate about civic engagement.''He is definitely right that a lot of our connections with one another are more tenuous than they used to be, and he is right, in his final chapter, to call us to task,'' said Robert Wuthnow, a Princeton University sociologist. ''But he has a single-minded thesis that fails to paint the complex picture that actually exists.''He ignores, for example, the proliferation of nonprofit groups, ''from soup kitchens to private schools to foundations to think tanks to social welfare organizations,'' Mr. Wuthnow said. ''These are mostly small, and they function like the civic groups that Putnam says are declining.''Some nonprofits do function that way, but others are created in wills to avoid estate taxes, Mr. Putnam replies. At 59, he has sampled the post-World War II stages of civic engagement, from its heyday in the late 1940's and 50's, when he was growing up in Port Clinton, Ohio, a rural town on Lake Erie, to its decline, which he has experienced mostly as a resident of Lexington, Mass., a Boston suburb. As a teenager he bowled on Saturdays in a league. A photo of his five-member team, recently found among his mother's belongings, decorates the jacket of his new book. Two of the boys are black. (Mr. Putnam is white.)''The fact of the matter is that bowling leagues, even in the 1950's, did bring people together, across class lines; it is the least class-specific sport in America,'' he said. ''You need this sort of bridging social capital for civic engagement to really work.''Whatever the virtues of bowling, Mr. Putnam was not particularly good at it, with scores averaging less than 150 a game. As an adult he has rarely bowled, apart from occasional outings when his two children, now married, were still young: family bowling, not league bowling. Lately, however, in recognition of the publicity his research has brought to the sport, his students celebrate the end of a semester with a bowling party or by giving him bowling knickknacks.Others have given him knickknacks, too. He ticks them off: bowling salt and pepper shakers, bowling towels and shoes, books about bowling, jokes about bowling, a tie decorated with a bowling lane. Tchotchkes, he calls them, invoking a Yiddish word, and a reminder that religion has played a big role in civic engagement and his life. Raised a Methodist, he converted to Judaism, his wife's religion, when they married 37 years ago. ''We agreed it was important that we have one religion,'' Rosemary Putnam said.Now Mrs. Putnam, 59, a public school special-education teacher, is the one who is civically engaged: playing French horn in the Lexington band, active in her temple's sisterhood, member of a book group, volunteer tutor of immigrants in English, active in a teachers association. Her husband sang in the town chorus for a year or two; but absorbed in his teaching, research and writing, he withdrew, becoming an example of the disengagement he now chronicles.The Putnam thesis dwells on the precipitous decline since 1970 of community groups: the Elks, the Rotary, the Masons, the Boy Scouts and Girl Scouts, the American Legion, parent-teacher associations, local chapters of political parties, religious institutions, softball teams, art groups, union locals, town bands and scores of others. Apart from not joining, people vote less, give fewer dinner parties, and are more likely to have unlisted phone numbers, to sue and to rely on security guards. Trust has in effect declined, and trust is a big element of social capital fostered by civic connectedness, Mr. Putnam argues.''Connectedness really matters,'' he said at a White House conference last month. ''Wonderful studies, controlling for your blood chemistry and how old you are and your gender and whether you jog and whether you smoke and so on, show that your chances of dying over the next year are cut in half by joining one group. Cut in a quarter by joining two groups.''Much of Mr. Putnam's evidence for the decline in civic engagement came from a huge mass of previously untapped lifestyle surveys compiled over the years by Roper and DDB Needham. Polls designed for marketing and then stored away became in Mr. Putnam's hands historical data on civic engagement. ''If the client was Hallmark, it wanted to know about churchgoing, and food companies wanted to know about family dinner trends,'' Mr. Putnam said.Other community activities have grown, of course. Volunteering is one. And children play soccer more than ever, on teams organized by parents, although Mr. Putnam found that ''if every single soccer mom and dad in America went to every single soccer game, that would not be as large a number as the number of people who stopped bowling in leagues.''Theda Skocpol, a Harvard sociologist, says that beyond the community, advocacy groups -- organizations like the Sierra Club, the Children's Defense Fund, the American Association of Retired Persons -- have become a new form of social connectedness. They are an outgrowth of the civil rights movement, the anti-Vietnam War protests, women's liberation: issues that the old civic engagement failed to address.But she adds that rather than fostering give-and-take conversation, the advocacy groups are run by ''elite people more than ever,'' while the millions of members mail in their dues and contributions. It is a system that ''contributes to the sense of most Americans that everything is going on above their heads,'' Ms. Skocpol said, causing them to pull back from public life.Whether Internet communication can reverse this trend, recreating the old conversation in a new format, Mr. Putnam says he does not know. He guesses that the Internet will complement rather than replace face-to-face communications. But he is not sure. ''I am worried,'' he said, ''that I will end up in the long sweep of history having written a book about disconnection at the very moment that technology was changing the equation.''Although Mr. Putnam acknowledges that the rise of the two-earner family cuts into time available for civic engagement, economics plays a relatively small role in his scheme. Electronic entertainment, mostly television, gets 25 percent of the blame.Just as they bowl alone, people increasingly watch television alone. It isolates. So does suburban sprawl and the additional commuting time, alone in a car, that sprawl requires. People increasingly live in one suburb, work in another and shop at malls in a third location, Mr. Putnam finds.The biggest culprit, however, is generational change, he concluded. The Depression and World War II produced a generation of civic-minded Americans. As that generation has aged, giving way to less trustful more isolated Americans, civic engagement and social capital have declined. Still, Mr. Putnam is optimistic. Just as the mass immigration in the late 19th century and the shift from farms to cities resulted in the creation of the community groups and ties now in decline, the new circumstances should create new institutions.That leap of faith is greeted with skepticism by Ms. Skocpol and other social scientists. But Mr. Putnam, in his enthusiasm, sees his own efforts and those of a few others engaged in community organization as the beginning of a revival of the old connectedness in new ways not yet evident. Or as he puts it in the last sentences of his book: ''Henry Ward Beecher's advice a century ago to 'multiply picnics' is not entirely ridiculous today. We should do this, ironically, not because it will be good for America -- though it will be -- but because it will be good for us.''
There haven't been raves like this since ''Saving Private Ryan.''''One of the best events that I've ever seen!'' -- Regis PhilbinThere haven't been raves like this since ''Saving Private Ryan.''''One of the best events that I've ever seen!'' -- Regis Philbin''It doesn't get any better!'' -- Sam Donaldson''Give that guy another term!'' -- Entertainment WeeklyThe show that earned these cheers was Bill Clinton's stand-up comedy routine at the White House correspondents' dinner last Saturday. If it had been rerun any more often, it might have turned C-Span into E! The president easily bested Jay Leno, the other act on the bill.As if to ratify Mr. Clinton's triumph, The Washington Post ran a front-page headline on Monday: '' 'Clinton Fatigue' Yields to Nostalgia.'' The Post cited polls showing that not only would Democrats vastly prefer Mr. Clinton to Al Gore as a candidate this year but that in a recent match-up the president pulled even with George W. Bush nationwide. Granted, this country has a short memory, but isn't Bill Clinton the same guy who was impeached and tried only 15 months ago? It's almost an insult to call him the comeback kid. He's had more comebacks than Elizabeth Taylor, Liza Minnelli and Richard Nixon combined.Or were they really comebacks? Writing in The New Republic two months ago, Sean Wilentz declared ''Clinton fatigue'' to be ''an utter hoax'' and ''the latest sign of the growing gap between what the public actually thinks and what the pundits claim the public thinks.'' He pointed out that the president's job-approval ratings -- the numbers most predictive of election results -- have been higher than those at equivalent dates in Ronald Reagan's lame-duck term, even during (or especially during) impeachment. The American historian Alan Brinkley notes that ''if you take away the first two years'' of the first Clinton term, ''he'd have the highest ratings in the postwar era'' of any president. ''It really is remarkable,'' Mr. Brinkley adds. ''For someone who has a hostile Republican Congress to deal with, he seems to exercise more power over Congress than most presidents have had over Congresses of their own party.''Nowhere was this more evident than in the Elian Gonzalez denouement. Immediately after Janet Reno's Miami raid, the now-familiar political arsenal of the anti-Clintonistas was rolled into place. Tom DeLay denounced federal agents as ''jackbooted thugs'' -- bizarrely reviving the N.R.A.'s incendiary pre-Oklahoma City rhetoric for the fifth anniversary of the bombing. The Wall Street Journal editorial page floated conspiracy theories in line with its tortuous efforts to link Mr. Clinton to drug-running at an obscure Arkansas airport; this time it speculated that the president might have been blackmailed by Fidel Castro and that Elian might have been drugged ''while in U.S. government custody.'' Enter the auxiliary troops, Matt Drudge and Lucianne Goldberg, whose Web sites offered painstaking exegeses of how the government doctored the photos of Elian and Dad.''You bet there'll be Congressional hearings,'' stormed Mr. DeLay on ''Meet the Press,'' echoing cries by Trent Lott and Orrin Hatch. And they'd be run by Henry Hyde, no less! The only missing element from this picture of Clinton hatred in full cry was the corpse of Vincent Foster.But where, pray tell, are those hearings? Apparently Clinton nostalgia trumps whatever remains of his opponents' testosterone. Reflecting the president's clout, polls showed that 60 percent approved of the raid and 68 percent didn't want any hearings -- numbers consistent with those balking at impeachment hearings and the Congressional release of the Starr report two years ago. No sooner did the Elian inquisition flame out than Jim Kolbe, an Arizona Congressman, also decided not ''to pursue any more hearings'' on Hillary Clinton's government-paid transportation for her Senate campaign. Such is Mr. Clinton's political potency that James Rogan, a House impeachment prosecutor now battling for re-election in California, popped up with the impeached president in a White House rally for gun control. Surely it's only days before William Bennett concedes to Larry King that, all in all, the Clintons' marriage is more credible than that of the other aspiring senatorial couple, the Giulianis, who can't even fake a truce for the sake of their kids after a cancer diagnosis.  My first sighting of conspicuous Republican nostalgia for Mr. Clinton was in March, when Ben Stein, the former Nixon speechwriter and host of TV's ''Win Ben Stein's Money,'' praised the president in USA Today for showing ''a lot of heart'' by sending top administration officials to the funeral of his father, the G.O.P. economist Herbert Stein. Ben Stein dislikes Mr. Clinton, writes for the Clinton-bashing journal American Spectator and is solidly behind Mr. Bush. And yet he had this to say over the phone this week: ''I will miss Clinton's humanity like I miss Nixon's humanity. You know a person is a person by his failings, and Clinton has a lot of failings. Without that human touch, you lose an important ability to connect with the body politic. Two machines are running to replace him -- the Gore machine, in which everything is calculated and calibrated, and the Bush machine, which is even more so. I don't like the idea of being governed by a machine. I like being governed by someone who has as many failings as I do.''Darrell Hammond, the Clinton impersonator on ''Saturday Night Live,'' has a not dissimilar take on Clinton nostalgia: ''I never met anyone who touches people as much as he does. . . . Here was a man caught lying on camera by an entire planet and got away with it and talked his way out of it. He's a scalawag, but darn, he does a good job! Crime's down, jobs are up, the budget's balanced. Who wouldn't miss him? When he gets that little crinkle in his voice, he's selling it to you and you're going to buy.''Mr. Hammond is ready to go with his impersonation of Al Gore -- possibly tonight -- but is mindful of the vast difference between the two men. ''Clinton only shows you what he wants you to see,'' he says. ''Gore shows you what he wants to show you and everything else. You see the puppet and the puppetmaster. You see the ventriloquist's mouth move. The poor guy is trying too hard. So much preparation, so earnest, so much fumbling and stumbling. He should go out and say I can't act, I can't dance -- or nothing -- but I really want to be president.''This shortfall makes it unlikely that Clinton nostalgia will automatically benefit Mr. Gore come fall. If anything, the closest heir to Mr. Clinton so far is Mr. Bush. The president indicated as much in his stand-up routine, when he joked that the Texas governor had hijacked his old Dick Morris campaign strategy of ''moving toward the political center, distancing himself from his own party [and] stealing ideas from the other party.'' The parallels don't end there, or with the unsubstantiated drug rumors that have stalked both men without ever denting their political fortunes.In the '92 campaign, Mr. Clinton said that ''the most important thing'' he had accomplished as governor of Arkansas was improving education -- a claim no more borne out by Arkansas's dismal rankings in students' test scores than are Mr. Bush's hyperbolic claims for Texas. Mr. Bush's ''compassionate conservatism'' -- in which the federal government plays bite-sized roles in helping to feel and soothe Americans' pain -- lifts specific ideas from Mr. Clinton's New Democrat policies. Both men also have in common the repellent trait of advertising their toughness on crime by savage brandishing of the death penalty as governors: Mr. Clinton refused clemency to the brain-damaged Rickey Ray Rector; Mr. Bush denied clemency to Karla Faye Tucker and then mocked her in a Talk magazine interview with Tucker Carlson.This isn't to say that Mr. Bush is remotely in the Clinton league as entertainer in chief; no one is. Reading up for his game show on presidents who ''were grossly overweight, got drunk and went to all-night parties,'' Ben Stein ruefully observed, ''Clinton will be the last of the rollicking over-the-top characters for the foreseeable future.''If we hadn't gotten off the phone soon after, I fear we both would have been in tears.
Following are excerpts from the prepared text of a speech about education that Vice President Al Gore delivered yesterday to the teachers union in Lansing, Mich., as provided by Mr. Gore's campaign:Think about it: we're asking America's teachers to meet our greatest obligation for the future. We're asking them to educate and help mold our children. Yet we pay them far less than other professionals with essentially the same qualifications are now earning. And that is wrong.Following are excerpts from the prepared text of a speech about education that Vice President Al Gore delivered yesterday to the teachers union in Lansing, Mich., as provided by Mr. Gore's campaign:Think about it: we're asking America's teachers to meet our greatest obligation for the future. We're asking them to educate and help mold our children. Yet we pay them far less than other professionals with essentially the same qualifications are now earning. And that is wrong.In communities where schools, teachers, community groups, and local businesses agree on effective plans to raise teacher quality, let's give every qualified teacher a $5,000 raise.Let's give $10,000 raises to master teachers, and those who become certified by the National Board for Professional Teaching Standards.Let's reward all teachers in schools where the entire school meets agreed-upon performance goals, which include higher student achievement. Let's work with teachers and administrators to develop plans that reward individual teachers. And based on the innovative plan negotiated and partly designed by teachers in Denver, I believe we should ask teachers to help us find proper ways to integrate gains in student performance with the other criteria that should be used for rewarding excellence in teaching.The simple fact is that raising teacher salaries and rewarding excellence is essential to the third challenge I want to discuss:  making sure that all teachers have the professional development and support they need to meet higher standards.If I'm entrusted with the presidency, I will require states to guarantee that all teachers are fully certified or working toward certification and that all middle school and high school teachers have a major, a minor, or demonstrated ability in the subject they teach. . . . Right now, one quarter of all high school teachers don't have even a minor in the subject they teach.So I will combine greater accountability with greater investment, building on our recent $1 billion national commitment to intensive professional development for America's teachers. . . .I believe all new teachers should have to pass a rigorous and fair assessment, which includes tests in the subjects they will teach, before they set foot in the classroom. We should test new elementary school teachers, to make sure they are prepared to teach the crucial subject of reading, as part of a national crusade to ensure that every child can read independently and well by the end of the third grade. And I believe states should be required to conduct these tests as a condition for receiving federal funding. . . .I urge faster but fair ways, within due process, to identify, help and, when necessary, speedily remove low-performing teachers. While we know the vast majority of teachers are doing a good job, we know there are a few who are not. And we know that they unfairly reflect on all those who are. That means that while we absolutely must respect due process, we have to put an end to endless delays in removing those teachers who really need to be removed.We should also empower principals, with the active participation and advice of teams of teachers, to hire their own staffs, based on expertise and support for the school's academic mission, and not solely on seniority.  And we should empower principals, with the participation of teachers, to manage their own budgets.At its best, teaching is a lifetime vocation.  But no teaching license or contract should be a lifetime job guarantee. And let me be clear: we have to give all our teachers the support and training they need to succeed.THE 2000 CAMPAIGN
THE REPUBLICANSWEIGHING BUDGET PROPOSALS -- Gov. George W. Bush of Texas began a news conference in San Diego yesterday with some heavy lifting: he waved two thick books that represented budget proposals he had sent to the Texas Legislature in 1997 and 1999, and he lit into Vice President Al Gore anew for suggesting that he did not produce such extensive spending blueprints. The books in his hand, Mr. Bush said, proved otherwise. Only the day before, Mr. Gore had pulled from his pocket a three-page document that he said was a copy of Mr. Bush's 1995 budget, telling a reporter that ''if you think that's a budget, then maybe I can convince you it's a duck.'' Mr. Bush turned to examples from later years and said he was wishing fervently for a campaign ''not full of hyperbole and distortion.''Frank Bruni (NYT)THE POLLSTHE REPUBLICANSWEIGHING BUDGET PROPOSALS -- Gov. George W. Bush of Texas began a news conference in San Diego yesterday with some heavy lifting: he waved two thick books that represented budget proposals he had sent to the Texas Legislature in 1997 and 1999, and he lit into Vice President Al Gore anew for suggesting that he did not produce such extensive spending blueprints. The books in his hand, Mr. Bush said, proved otherwise. Only the day before, Mr. Gore had pulled from his pocket a three-page document that he said was a copy of Mr. Bush's 1995 budget, telling a reporter that ''if you think that's a budget, then maybe I can convince you it's a duck.'' Mr. Bush turned to examples from later years and said he was wishing fervently for a campaign ''not full of hyperbole and distortion.''Frank Bruni (NYT)THE POLLSLEADING THE RACE FOR NO. 2 -- Gov. George W. Bush and Vice President Al Gore remain tight-lipped about running mates, but an NBC News-Wall Street Journal poll has found that most voters have already made up their minds. Among Republicans and independents, 40 percent want Mr. Bush to pick Gen. Colin L. Powell, the retired chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, 20 percent favor Senator John McCain of Arizona and 15 percent favor Elizabeth Dole, the former secretary of labor. Among Democrats and independents, 33 percent want Mr. Gore to pick former Senator Bill Bradley of New Jersey and 18 percent favor Senator Dianne Feinstein of California. The poll surveyed 1,003 registered voters from April 29 to May 1 and has a margin of sampling error of plus or minus three percentage points.(NYT)THE ADVERTISINGA QUESTION OF INFLUENCE -- Increasingly this year, interest groups as prominent as the National Rifle Association and as obscure as Republicans for Clean Air are running television commercials intended to influence elections. This week Karl J. Sandstrom, a Democratic member of the Federal Election Commission, proposed that these groups be required to say whom they represented and where the money came from to pay for the advertising. But do not count on the matter going anywhere. Experts on election law say the commission probably has no authority to order the interest groups to report on their affairs.David E. Rosenbaum (NYT)THE REFORM PARTYTHE CHAIRMAN RESIGNS -- The chairman of the Reform Party, Pat Choate, resigned yesterday, citing an illness in his family. The vice chairman, Gerald Moan of Tucson, Ariz., will fill in until a new chairman is selected at the party's summer convention, Mr. Choate said. An ally of H. Ross Perot, the party's founder, Mr. Choate overcame a challenge to his leadership earlier this year from a wing of the party led by Gov. Jesse Ventura of Minnesota.The Associated PressTHE 2000 CAMPAIGN
The lines that divide the presidential candidates on the issue of gun control came into sharper focus today, as Vice President Al Gore vowed to veto any measure prohibiting cities from suing gun manufacturers and Gov. George W. Bush suggested he might support it.Gun manufacturers have been lobbying Federal lawmakers for such legislation; Mr. Gore, in an interview today, pledged to block that effort and questioned whether Mr. Bush would do likewise.The lines that divide the presidential candidates on the issue of gun control came into sharper focus today, as Vice President Al Gore vowed to veto any measure prohibiting cities from suing gun manufacturers and Gov. George W. Bush suggested he might support it.Gun manufacturers have been lobbying Federal lawmakers for such legislation; Mr. Gore, in an interview today, pledged to block that effort and questioned whether Mr. Bush would do likewise.''I challenge Governor Bush to make the same pledge,'' Mr. Gore said in an interview with Political Points, the Webcast of The New York Times and ABC News. ''Will he veto any bill that lets gun manufacturers off the hook? Will he fight for the gun industry or for America's families?''When Mr. Bush was asked about that at a subsequent news conference here, he said, ''It depends on what's in the legislation.''But the Texas governor added, ''You can get a feel for my position by looking at what I've done in office, and what I did in office was sign a bill that made it very difficult for local municipalities to sue manufacturers of a legal product.''Mr. Bush was referring to a 1999 law that required lawsuits against gun makers to be filed, on behalf of Texas cities or counties, by the state attorney general, who might or might not support that course of action. The measure was similar to ones supported by other Republican governors, and reflected their general push to curb civil litigation in an array of areas.The divergent statements of Mr. Gore and Mr. Bush continued an often tense back-and-forth over gun control that has lasted several days and signaled the potential potency of the issue in the 2000 elections. Each candidate has been trying to cast doubt on his opponent's commitment to gun control, and each has been trying to tar the other by linking him to the National Rifle Association.At his news conference, Mr. Bush said that Mr. Gore had a voting history in Congress of support for the N.R.A.'s positions and a good deal of explaining to do.As Mr. Bush's aides circulated a brief document, titled ''Al Gore & Guns,'' that cited examples from the 1980's of Mr. Gore's agreements with the gun lobby, the governor used a news conference here today to cast the vice president as a candidate whose current advocacy of more stringent restrictions on firearms was simply the latest fashion, not a matter of steadfast principle.''When it was convenient politically, he voted one way,'' Mr. Bush said, ''and when it's convenient politically, he's changed his tune.''Mr. Bush also refused to back off his suggestion on Thursday that Mr. Gore was once a member of the N.R.A. and, when challenged today to say how he knew that, offered no proof.Instead, he reminded reporters that he ended his statement about Mr. Gore and the N.R.A. with the phrase ''if I'm not mistaken,'' and told them it was their job to verify the assertion and Mr. Gore's responsibility to show that he was not a member of the group.Pressed about where he had gotten the idea in the first place, the governor responded, ''A little birdie.''William Powers, a spokesman for the gun organization, said he had found no evidence that Mr. Gore had been a member. But he said that when Mr. Gore was a congressman from Tennessee, ''he certainly received very high ratings from the N.R.A.''Douglas Hattaway, a spokesman for the Gore campaign, said that it could not find any record of Mr. Gore's ever being a member of the N.R.A., and that the vice president ''doesn't have any recollection of it.''''But it's an irrelevant issue anyway,'' Mr. Hattaway added. ''Al Gore is standing up to the N.R.A.'s leadership and its increasingly extreme agenda, while Bush is doing their bidding.''The exchanges between the Bush and Gore campaigns were touched off in part by a gun control group's distribution this week of a television commercial featuring footage of an N.R.A. official saying that if Mr. Bush became president, the organization would be working out of the White House. Mr. Bush said that was not true.His efforts today to turn the tables on Mr. Gore seemed to reflect not only the ascendancy of gun control as a political issue but also Mr. Bush's desire to court swing voters, many of whom favor greater regulation of firearms.And Mr. Bush took his swipes at Mr. Gore during his third day of campaigning in California, a state full of such voters.In fact, Mr. Bush's campaign schedule here this week represented an especially aggressive attempt to portray the Texas governor as a progressive, open-minded Republican by emphasizing his sensitivity of religious and ethnic diversity.In recognition of Cinco de Mayo, a Mexican-American holiday, Mr. Bush delivered a long address here this morning on the shared values of Latinos and other Americans. In it Mr. Bush used more Spanish phrases and sentences than he had previously used on the campaign trail this year.And he made a plea for greater acceptance of new immigrants, recalling his introduction, during a walk through Santa Ana on Thursday, to a grocery store owner who had come to California from Mexico with very little except ''a sueno,'' or dream.Mr. Bush's remarks, delivered to hundreds of people at a ''breakfast fiesta'' sponsored by a private group called the U.S.-Mexico Foundation, followed a series of events, encounters and photo opportunities -- many of them filmed by the candidate's advertising team -- that put Mr. Bush together with Latino and Roman Catholic voters.The first group is crucial to Mr. Bush's hopes of winning California. The second is key to his success nationwide, and Mr. Bush has been working especially hard to appeal to Catholics since his controversial appearance in February at Bob Jones University in South Carolina, a school with a history of anti-Catholic bias.The Bush campaign also said today that Mr. Bush would postpone a speech about Social Security, scheduled for Monday, so that he could attend the funeral Mass for Cardinal John O'Connor in New York.According to the Bush campaign document about Mr. Gore's record on gun control in Congress, he supported a measure to remove a ban on interstate sales of rifles, shotguns and handguns; opposed a 14-day waiting period for handgun purchases, and from 1985 to 1990, as a  senator from Tennessee, cast votes that were in line with the wishes of the N.R.A. three-quarters of the time.Mr. Hattaway did not dispute that, saying that Mr. Gore's positions had evolved with the growing prevalence of gun-related violence in the country. He also said the N.R.A. is more extreme now than it has been in the past.Mr. Hattaway noted that Mr. Gore now advocates a much wider array of restrictions on firearms than Mr. Bush, who signed legislation in Texas that permitted people to carry concealed handguns and seemed in other ways to agree with the N.R.A.Recently, though, Mr. Bush chastised an official with the organization for making inflammatory statements about President Clinton. He also signaled a slightly greater receptiveness to some gun-control proposals. And he has tried to link Mr. Gore to the N.R.A.THE 2000 CAMPAIGN: THE GUN ISSUE
There are very few differences, ritually speaking, between a funeral for a cardinal and one for any other Catholic. One is that a cardinal, like other priests, lies in state in his church before burial. In this case, of course, the cardinal is John O'Connor, who died at 80 on Wednesday night, and the church is St. Patrick's Cathedral, the largest Roman Catholic cathedral in the United States.As mourners pay their respects to Cardinal O'Connor this weekend, they will see him dressed in the same vestments he would use when celebrating a Mass on Easter or Christmas, with the white bishop's miter that is reserved for the holiest days. On his wedding finger, there is a ring that symbolizes devotion to his flock.There are very few differences, ritually speaking, between a funeral for a cardinal and one for any other Catholic. One is that a cardinal, like other priests, lies in state in his church before burial. In this case, of course, the cardinal is John O'Connor, who died at 80 on Wednesday night, and the church is St. Patrick's Cathedral, the largest Roman Catholic cathedral in the United States.As mourners pay their respects to Cardinal O'Connor this weekend, they will see him dressed in the same vestments he would use when celebrating a Mass on Easter or Christmas, with the white bishop's miter that is reserved for the holiest days. On his wedding finger, there is a ring that symbolizes devotion to his flock.Before he is placed in the crypt underneath the high altar, a final commendation will be spoken, most likely by one of the three cardinals who will preside over the funeral Mass. After another rite, the Prayer of Entombment, the cardinal's family and the clergymen will file out of the crypt, and the cardinal will be entombed in private, said the Rev. Eric Raaser, dean of students at the St. John Neumann Seminary Residence. There the cardinal will rest, unless there is a motion to canonize him and his coffin is disinterred to check whether, by chance or miracle, his body has remained ''incorruptible.''As the funeral weekend progresses, there are hundreds of details to be taken care of. But the liturgical ones are almost rote, compared with the logistical ones.Some matters were far from the spiritual. And many of them were attended to by Joseph Zwilling, the  press spokesman who had played straight man to the quip-loving cardinal for 16 years. No, he did not remember saying NY1 could set up a camera stand on the steps of the cathedral, Mr. Zwilling almost sighed into a walkie-talkie after a news briefing yesterday, a few hours before the cardinal's body was due to arrive there.''We want this to be as dignified as possible,'' he said patiently. ''If it's what I'm picturing in my mind, I probably wouldn't have agreed to it.'' Then, almost in the same breath, he agreed to the camera stand if someone at the cathedral said it looked acceptable. A television journalist rushed in, late, and asked him how he was.''About to fall over,'' Mr. Zwilling said.For the funeral Mass, more than 3,500 tickets will be issued for a cathedral that seats 2,300. President and Mrs. Clinton will attend, Secret Service in tow. Vice President Al Gore, Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, Gov. George E. Pataki and Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani plan to come, as well. During the Mass at 2 p.m. Monday, the streets around St. Patrick's will be closed to traffic.In preparation, the Catholic Center on First Avenue has suspended all its normal operations. An ad hoc office was created to help with hospitality arrangements. A command center was set up to handle calls. The director of human resources, Deacon Randy Velez, spent yesterday manning one of six urgently ringing phones, talking to everyone from a new convert in Denver who wanted to express his condolences, to the Archbishop of Northern Ireland calling about his trip.On Thursday, the Archdiocese faxed forms to every bishop asking for their R.S.V.P.'s and travel requirements. All eight United States cardinals will be at the funeral, along with the Vatican's secretary of state, Cardinal Angelo Sodano, who will preside over the Mass. ''Every bishop I can think of will be attending,'' Deacon Velez said.Before the Mass, the priests will gather at the Palace Hotel, across the street from the cathedral buildings, to put on their robes for the procession of concelebrants, or clergy. The bishops will dress downstairs at the cathedral, and exit through the side door to join the procession, which will be arranged by rank.There will be no altar boys; instead the altar will be manned, as it is every third Sunday, by seminarians from St. Joseph's Seminary of Dunwoodie, N.Y. The Rev. Tom Lynch, the seminary's master of ceremonies, said that all 40 seminarians would be on hand to help the concelebrants, but only eight would serve at the altar. There was not much debate  over which eight would have the honor.''Frankly, I just look at who's better at pushing priests around, and doing it nicely,'' Father Lynch said.While Cardinal Sodano will preside over the Mass, two men who were at the cardinal's deathbed will, according to his request, take part. Cardinal Bernard Law, archbishop of Boston, will deliver the homily, and Cardinal William Wakefield Baum, a Vatican official, will give an address.It is not unusual for such requests to be made, even when they break with the tradition of bishops preaching at bishops' funerals. At the funeral for Cardinal Joseph Bernardin, archbishop of Chicago, in 1996, a monsignor who had long been his secretary gave the homily.At St. Patrick's, multiple Masses will be held all weekend for groups of special concern to Cardinal O'Connor, including children and the disabled. Those Masses are all open to the public.''What was really our overriding concern was that as many people be given an opportunity to pay their respects,'' Mr. Zwilling said.The Public MourningSATURDAY1 p.m. Mass (open to public, particularly children and the disabled)5 p.m. Solemn vespers (evening prayers)8 p.m. Rosary recitationsSUNDAY1 p.m. Mass (open to public but special invitations to those from cardinal's previous pastoral affiliations, the Archdiocese of Philadelphia, the Archdiocese of Scranton and the military)5:30 p.m. Mass of the Holy Eucharist (open to public but special invitations to archdiocesan employees, religious brothers and sisters)8 p.m. Vigil for the Deceased (prayer service, open to public with special invitation to the Intercultural Council)MONDAY2 p.m.Mass of Christian Burial (tickets required)DEATH OF A CARDINAL: THE PREPARATIONS
INTERNATIONALA3-6300 U.N. Peacekeepers Are Held in Sierra Leone  Rebels now hold more than 300 United Nations troops hostage, and contact has been lost with some peacekeeping units, officials said.A1War and Censorship in Sri Lanka  The government said troops had pushed back Tamil rebels trying to capture the northern city of Jaffna. Officials also deleted portions of news agency reports describing an opposition rally to protest the authorities' broad new powers.A4INTERNATIONALA3-6300 U.N. Peacekeepers Are Held in Sierra Leone  Rebels now hold more than 300 United Nations troops hostage, and contact has been lost with some peacekeeping units, officials said.A1War and Censorship in Sri Lanka  The government said troops had pushed back Tamil rebels trying to capture the northern city of Jaffna. Officials also deleted portions of news agency reports describing an opposition rally to protest the authorities' broad new powers.A4New Effort on Ulster  The British and Irish governments said they had agreed on a formula to restart the suspended power-sharing government in Belfast and they urged Ulster's Catholic and Protestant leaders to endorse it.A4Swiss Banks Holocaust Offer  Representatives of Swiss commercial banks and Holocaust survivors are expected to present final details of a $1.25 billion restitution settlement to a federal judge next week, after two of the largest banks agreed to give the survivors' lawyers access to databases containing information on 2.1 million Nazi-era accounts, the lead lawyer for the survivors said.A3Turkey Names President  Parliament elected the country's top judicial official, Ahmet Necdet Sezer, to the presidency. Although it is a largely symbolic post, Mr. Sezer will be expected to help guide Turkey toward democratic changes that are crucial to Turkey's gaining entry to the European Union.A4Israel Halts Lebanon Reprisals  The government, which needs international support in its coming troop withdrawal from southern Lebanon, decided to discontinue reprisal bombings in Lebanon even as more guerrilla attacks took place.A3Iran Holds Runoff Election  Iranians voted in runoff elections for Parliament in an atmosphere of heightened suspense after the conservative crackdown on the politically ascendant reform movement.A6Clinton Meets Japan Leader  President Clinton and Japan's new prime minister, Yoshiro Mori, met in Washington. It was their first meeting since Mr. Mori stepped into the top job after Keizo Obuchi fell into a stroke-induced coma.(Reuters)World BriefingA5NATIONALA7-10, 28Government Investigating Ex-Director of C.I.A.  The Justice Department, in a reversal of an earlier decision, has begun a criminal investigation with the F.B.I. to determine whether John M. Deutch mishandled classified material by placing it on unsecure computers in his home, officials said.A1Spy Inquiry Finds Nothing  Federal officials conducted a highly classified espionage investigation into whether Israeli intelligence agents had used a software company in Missouri, Amdocs, to intercept telephone conversations from the White House, State Department and other agencies, officials said. The inquiry found no evidence that that had occurred, officials said.A9Pretrial Ruling in Tripp Case  A Maryland judge ruled that the prosecution of Linda R. Tripp on wiretapping charges could proceed, but the judge also disallowed important testimony concerning Monica S. Lewinsky's assertions about the date of a specific conversation that Ms. Tripp secretly tape-recorded. The trial is scheduled for July 10.A7Differing on Gun Lawsuits  Vice President Al Gore vowed to veto any measure prohibiting cities from suing gun manufacturers, while Gov. George W. Bush suggested he might support such a measure. Mr. Bush also cast the vice president as a candidate whose advocacy of more stringent restrictions on firearms was simply the latest fashion, not a matter of steadfast principle.A8Gore's Proposals on Teachers  Vice President Al Gore promised to spend billions to recruit new teachers and increase teachers' salaries, but only if the states and teachers' unions agreed that all new teachers meet rigorous national standards and only if hiring decisions are based on expertise, not seniority alone.A8Mississippi Flag Commission  Gov. Ronnie Musgrove formed an advisory commission to design a state flag, following a court ruling that the state actually had no official flag. The flag that the state now flies has been challenged by blacks and others who resent its incorporation of a Confederate symbol.A7BeliefsA10NEW YORK/REGIONB1-7Solemn Procession Returns The Cardinal to His Church  Cardinal John O'Connor's body was brought to St. Patrick's Cathedral, beginning a period of mourning and ritual that will culminate on Monday with a funeral Mass. Burial will be in a crypt in the cathedral.B1Needle Bill Is Approved  The Legislature passed a measure submitted by Governor Pataki to permit the sale and possession of hypodermic needles without a prescription, an effort to slow the spread of H.I.V. among drug addicts.B2No Promises in Cable Dispute  Time Warner and ABC executives told the City Council that they could not guarantee that ABC programs would not be disrupted again.B3EDUCATIONDistricts and Autism  The needs of parents with autistic children are increasingly clashing with the bottom lines of school districts, which must pay for expensive services for students who may never set foot in district classrooms.A1Chancellor Hopeful Barred  Irving S. Hamer Jr., the Manhattan member of the New York City Board of Education, was barred by his colleagues from pursuing the chancellorship. Dr. Hamer responded that he would continue to withhold his support from Harold O. Levy, the interim chancellor, effectively paralyzing Mr. Levy's candidacy.B3OBITUARIESA11ARTS & IDEASB9-18SPORTSD1-8First Jewel in Triple Crown  The 126th Kentucky Derby will be run today, with Fusaichi Pegasus the favorite among the field of 19.D1Utah and Los Angeles Advance  The Jazz beat the Seattle SuperSonics, 96-93, and the Lakers beat the Sacramento Kings, 113-86, to win their first-round N.B.A. playoff series.D6BUSINESS DAYC1-143.9 Percent Jobless Rate  The unemployment rate in April fell below 4 percent for the first time in 30 years, helped in part by the hiring of 73,000 more census takers.A1The Dow jumped 165.37 points, or 1.6 percent, to 10,577.86; the Nasdaq climbed 96.58, or 2.6 percent, to 3,816.82; and the S.& P. 500 rose 23.06, or 1.6 percent, to 1,432.63.C3'I Love You' Investigation  Investigators focused on the Philippines in the search for the author of the malicious program that convulsed computer networks this week. At least eight variations of the program have cropped up.C1Advertising Merger Talks  WPP Group of Britain said merger talks with Young & Rubicam had resumed, a week after breaking off. At the same time, Young & Rubicam continues to be courted by Publicis, the French advertising company.C1Cisco Buying Switch Maker  Cisco, the network equipment maker, said it would acquire ArrowPoint Communications for $5.7 billion. ArrowPoint makes specialized computers that optimize the delivery of content over the Internet.C2Business DigestC1EDITORIALA14-15Editorials: Politics and the chancellor search; the Lockerbie bombing trial; paying for a trip, ethically; this week's season.  Columns: Frank Rich, Anthony Lewis.BridgeB17  TV ListingsB8  CrosswordB12  WeatherD7  Public LivesA7
For roughly half of the millions of salmon born on the Snake River that set out each spring for the Pacific Ocean, the journey past four federal dams is an arduous and often lethal one. They can be whacked to death by giant blades of the dam turbines, knocked out from collisions with concrete spillways, or succumb to a fatal condition not unlike the bends.The other half of the salmon have a much simpler trip: They get to take the boat.For roughly half of the millions of salmon born on the Snake River that set out each spring for the Pacific Ocean, the journey past four federal dams is an arduous and often lethal one. They can be whacked to death by giant blades of the dam turbines, knocked out from collisions with concrete spillways, or succumb to a fatal condition not unlike the bends.The other half of the salmon have a much simpler trip: They get to take the boat.But this annual free ride, by which the United States Army Corps of Engineers loads the young fish on barges and totes them around the dams, is coming under scrutiny like never before. And for scientists, lawmakers, farmers, fishermen, American Indians, barge shippers, environmentalists and a breathtaking array of other interested parties, the assessment is most likely the key to a momentous decision that will ultimately fall to the Congress: whether to take down the Snake River dams altogether.The job of protecting the baby salmon, so they can mature and  breed, is a remarkable feat of engineering and an expensive -- critics say outlandish -- accommodation to man's demands for electricity.Thousands of fish a day are diverted to a channel leading to a pipe that runs into troughs downstream of this dam, the first of the four, which is near the Idaho border. Standing by the troughs, a busy assembly line of seasonal workers briefly anesthetizes the salmon and then injects a computer chip the size of a rice grain into their bellies so they can be tracked over the years. They are barged for a 36-hour, 300-mile trip,  bypassing the dams on the Snake and four more on the Columbia River. More salmon are collected at two other dams on the Snake and one on the Columbia.It is all part of the government's  bid to keep both salmon and dams -- ''to find a way to have our cake and eat it, too,'' said Jim Anderson, a fisheries professor at the University of Washington.But with the river's coho salmon already declared extinct, and every other species of Snake River salmon and steelhead now listed under the Endangered Species Act, the once-unthinkable idea of breaching the dams has emerged in several federal studies as the action with the best chance of restoring healthy salmon runs. The Corps of Engineers is to recommend by the end of the year whether to propose such a step.Breaching the dams is bitterly opposed by many people as an assault on the area's agricultural economy, and the proposal has already emerged as a hot-button issue in the Northwest in this year's presidential race. Gov. George W. Bush of Texas vowed in the primary campaign here never to allow the dams to be breached, while Vice President Al Gore, part of an administration that is intensely debating the issue, has taken no public position.Breaching the dams would mean  removing the earthen parts and restoring a 140-mile section of the Snake to its wild, free-flowing condition, thus making salmon barging both impossible and unnecessary. It would also mean that the 4 percent of the electricity the dams provide in the Northwest would have to be supplied by other sources.The cost of the 20-year-old barging program for juvenile salmon, known as smolts, is just part of more than $3 billion the government has spent over that period trying to save salmon on the Snake and Columbia Rivers.The barging program is derided by critics as a ''techno-fix'' that harms fish, interfering with their natural migration rhythms, causing them to die early, and perhaps interfering with their fabled and mysterious ability to find their way back home to spawn in their native river after spending years and traveling thousands of miles in the Pacific Ocean, as far north as Alaska.Supporters of barging defend it as a kind of magic solution that could  allow the salmon and the dams to coexist. And the National Marine Fisheries Service, one of several federal agencies that must weigh in on the fate of the dams, recently said that a decision on breaching could be put off for 5 to 10 years if barging was continued and other aggressive conservation measures undertaken.So far, however, the results are hardly encouraging. While a corps brochure boasts that the barging system is ''custom-made to make the trip as safe and comfortable as possible,'' and while 98.5 percent of smolts survive the trip, the salmon themselves remain in decline.In most recent years, just 0.5 percent to 1 percent of all Snake River salmon have made it out to the ocean and all the way back, jumping through a ladder system that bypasses the dams, to their original spawning grounds. That is much less than the roughly 4 percent that scientists say the salmon stocks would need to recover fully.Researchers are unsure what percentages of barged and nonbarged fish are making it back, a question that the microchips implanted in recent years are supposed to help answer. (Some fish implanted with the chips are caught years later by fishermen, and ultimately served in restaurants; corps biologist said the chips are implanted in a part of the fish that is not consumed by humans.) But for many environmentalists, the numbers suggest that the barging efforts are not enough.''In a way, this issue about the difference in survival of transported fish versus fish that migrate through the river is a red herring,'' said Rob Masonis, regional director of hydropower programs for American Rivers, a conservation group. ''The fundamental question is whether either of those classes of fish are making it back to the Snake River at levels that would lead to survival or recovery. And the answer is clearly no.''Still, there is no scientific consensus on how large a culprit the dams are in the salmon's decline. Other factors are cyclical ocean conditions, commercial fishing and erosion of habitat all along the rivers where the salmon spawn, which is caused by construction, run-off from farms and  other factors.At this point, the dams on the Columbia are not candidates for breaching.And early counts indicate that the Snake River may this year see some of the highest numbers in recent years of returning adult chinook salmon, a result that would not take them off the endangered listing, but might lead supporters of barging to argue for more time to see if the program can work.Moreover, no scientist can guarantee that taking the dams down would revive the salmon runs the explorer William Clark found in the Snake River two centuries ago, when he wrote in his diary that the river was  ''crouded with salmon.''At that time, biologists estimate, about two million adult salmon a year completed the epic journey back to their spawning grounds; in most recent years, that number has been measured in the thousands or  only the hundreds for some types of  salmon.There is no question that, compared with those fish that have to navigate through the dams, a much higher percentage of salmon survive the barge trip, which drops them off just downstream of the Bonneville Dam on the Columbia River, the last man-made impediment before the fish can reach the Pacific.But as the tugboat Umatilla made its way down the Snake the other day, pushing a barge loaded, by the government's count, with 254,317 smolts, corps biologists said they were still gathering data on whether barging contributed to a much higher rate of what they termed ''delayed mortality'' among salmon transported that way.''With one big caveat, if I were a fish, I'd rather be here than there,'' said Doug Arndt, chief of the regional fish management division for the corps, standing aboard the barge and pointing to the dam on the river.''And that caveat is disease transmission,'' Mr. Arndt said. ''Is this program enhancing disease in these fish? We just don't know enough about it.''Jim Baker, the Northwest salmon campaign coordinator for the Sierra Club, said there were many ways in which barging could be harmful to fish, despite the fact that such high percentages survive the short trip itself.''For one thing, these barges are running on a human schedule, rather than the fishes' schedule,'' Mr. Baker said. ''There's a great deal of evidence that these fish are released too soon below the Bonneville Dam, so that they enter a salt water estuary too early in their development.''Professor Anderson of the University of Washington says that there is not enough research to show if barged fish die in much greater numbers than others.''There are a lot of hypotheses and no real ways to measure the mechanisms that might be producing this extramortality,'' Mr. Anderson said. ''So people are really making arguments on things for which we don't have enough information yet.''The fish transportation program started on an experimental basis in 1968 with trucks, and has been in full operation with barges since 1981.While the fisheries service is expected to recommend waiting for several years before a decision is made, the federal Environmental Protection Agency told the corps recently that the four dams harmed the river's water quality, endangered the salmon and might have to be breached to comply with the federal Clean Water Act. (Under the 1972 act, the E.P.A. has the power to enforce water-quality standards.)Opinions remain impassioned on both sides. The Columbia River Alliance, representing other commercial users of the river, said the breaching proposal was ''an economic dark cloud hanging over these communities that depend on dams.''But at a hearing on dam breaching in Seattle this winter, one fisherman said he did not want delays or stop-gap measures or ''Army Corps of Engineers Rube Goldberg barges.'' The solution, he said, was to ''let the Snake River flow.''
Vice President Al Gore promised today to spend billions of dollars to recruit new teachers and increase teachers' salaries, but only if the states and teachers' unions agreed that all new teachers meet rigorous national standards and only if hiring decisions are based on expertise, not seniority alone.''If I am entrusted with the presidency, I will ensure that there is a fully qualified, well-trained teacher in every single classroom, everywhere in this nation, before the next four years is out,'' Mr. Gore said in a speech here to the Michigan Education Association.Vice President Al Gore promised today to spend billions of dollars to recruit new teachers and increase teachers' salaries, but only if the states and teachers' unions agreed that all new teachers meet rigorous national standards and only if hiring decisions are based on expertise, not seniority alone.''If I am entrusted with the presidency, I will ensure that there is a fully qualified, well-trained teacher in every single classroom, everywhere in this nation, before the next four years is out,'' Mr. Gore said in a speech here to the Michigan Education Association.His proposals are based on the theory that the quality of teachers is the most significant factor within a school's control in improving student achievement.Education ranks near the top of voter concerns, especially in important states like Michigan, where Mr. Gore held his fourth ''school day'' today, spending all day at the high school in nearby Holt.''In communities where schools, teachers, community groups and local businesses agree on effective plans to raise teacher quality, let's give every qualified teacher a $5,000 raise,'' the vice president said here. ''Let's give $10,000 raises to master teachers.''The speech was yet another effort by Mr. Gore to spell out the details of his education plan, which would devote $115 billion to education over 10 years.He proposed spending $8 billion in that span to recruit a million new teachers, and another $8 billion to increase teachers' salaries. In addition, he said that by 2004 he would require states to make sure teachers were fully qualified to teach the subjects they were teaching. As of now, he said, only 36 percent of teachers considered themselves to be very well-prepared to meet the standards of their state or school district. In high-poverty areas, as many as 50 percent of the math teachers have not studied math.Education is an area to which Mr. Gore's Republican rival, Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, has devoted considerable attention in hopes of wooing swing voters. Polls show Mr. Bush has been successful in this effort. The Gore campaign is countering Mr. Bush's initiatives with proposals that do not just allocate federal money but also make demands of teachers and school districts.Mr. Gore proposes requiring teachers to have majored in their subject area in college or to pass a competency test. He would reward outstanding teachers and help schools improve or remove bad teachers quickly, within the academic year as opposed to the three years that removal can take now, aides said.''While we absolutely must respect due process,'' Mr. Gore said, ''we have to put an end to endless delays in removing those few teachers who really do need to be removed.''Principals should be allowed to hire teachers for reasons other than seniority, he said, adding that no teaching contract should be ''a lifetime job guarantee.''For years teacher testing and efforts to diminish hiring by seniority have been strongly resisted by teachers' unions. Mr. Gore's aides hoped that his speech today would be seen as a daring, principled stand that would demonstrate that he did not pander to potent supporters like the teachers' unions or just blow with the political winds.Amid growing dissatisfaction among parents over the quality of public education, teachers and their unions have recently eased their positions on testing and seniority. Last week the American Federation of Teachers, the nation's second-largest teachers' union, endorsed toughening teacher standards.Gregory King, a spokesman for Sandra Feldman, the president of the federation, said Mr. Gore consulted with Ms. Feldman on his proposals. She was heartened, Mr. King said, that Mr. Gore would cede some decisions on teacher hiring to ''principals working with teams of teachers, and not just principals.''Mary Elizabeth Teasley, the director of government relations for the nation's largest teachers' union, the National Education Association, said her union was comfortable with Mr. Gore's suggestion that seniority not be the only criterion in teacher hiring. She emphasized, however, that Mr. Gore was not dismissing seniority as a qualification.''I believe what he is putting forth is the notion that we should consider credentials and expertise, and that seniority could be a factor, it's just not the only factor,'' Ms. Teasley  said. ''We can work with it.''Mr. Gore has been trying to demonstrate his commitment to education in multiple ways, including by spending a full day at a school somewhere in the country every week or so. He spent today at Holt High after staying overnight at the home of Margot Strong, a computer teacher, and her husband, Jay, who teaches first grade. Mr. Gore arrived at their house after midnight on Thursday night and stayed up to watch on television four of the five overtime periods in the National Hockey League playoff game between the Philadelphia Flyers and the Pittsburgh Penguins.In an interview with the school newspaper, Mr. Gore was asked about abortion. He said he believed it was up to a woman to decide what to do, but he said he also believed in abstinence.And he revealed that his glory moment in high school was sinking a long shot at the final buzzer. Asked to list his favorite sports, he said: ''Football, basketball, track, art.''Asked what his most difficult moment as vice president had been, he answered without much hesitation,  ''The day our soldiers in Somalia were killed.''THE 2000 CAMPAIGN: THE VICE PRESIDENT
To the Editor:Re ''Invisible, Subtle Race Is On to Reach the Heights of No. 2'' (front page, May 3): Except for choosing a running mate, presidential candidates often dodge questions about appointments until they are elected.  Why shouldn't they name a few people they are considering for top cabinet posts? Besides helping voters, it might also serve the political interests of the candidates themselves.For example, Gov. George W. Bush and Vice President Al Gore both want to attract the independents who supported Senator John McCain. Why not ask Mr. McCain if he would be interested in serving as secretary of defense? He is passionate about improving the lot of the military.To the Editor:Re ''Invisible, Subtle Race Is On to Reach the Heights of No. 2'' (front page, May 3): Except for choosing a running mate, presidential candidates often dodge questions about appointments until they are elected.  Why shouldn't they name a few people they are considering for top cabinet posts? Besides helping voters, it might also serve the political interests of the candidates themselves.For example, Gov. George W. Bush and Vice President Al Gore both want to attract the independents who supported Senator John McCain. Why not ask Mr. McCain if he would be interested in serving as secretary of defense? He is passionate about improving the lot of the military.Arguably, voters also have a right to know who each of the two candidates is considering to head his economic team -- and the candidates might help their own causes by floating a few names.PETER A. POOLE  Oakton, Va., May 5, 2000The writer is a former Foreign Service officer.
GLAMOROUS as they may be by reputation, game safaris in East Africa, whether tented or otherwise, have never been truly luxurious, nor did most people expect them to be.It was felt, rather, that the experience should be at least just a little on the rough side, even if you were staying in game lodges and viewing the animals from a Land Rover or a minivan; that in short the authentic safari experience demanded, and was even improved by, a certain degree of character-building discomfort.GLAMOROUS as they may be by reputation, game safaris in East Africa, whether tented or otherwise, have never been truly luxurious, nor did most people expect them to be.It was felt, rather, that the experience should be at least just a little on the rough side, even if you were staying in game lodges and viewing the animals from a Land Rover or a minivan; that in short the authentic safari experience demanded, and was even improved by, a certain degree of character-building discomfort.In theory there is something to be said for keeping things a bit rugged when it comes to East African tourism: There's a romantic appeal to the notion of roughing it on safari, even though people nowadays are likely to be roughing it in permanent camps that have tents with roofs, indoor plumbing and electric lights (until the generator shuts off), or in a safari lodge, even the least luxurious of which have a bar, a gift shop and a swimming pool.But there's a larger philosophical question here. Over the past decade or more, East Africa has been moving steadily toward mass tourism. Some of the game parks -- Amboseli National Park, in Kenya, is a perfect example -- were virtually destroyed by the sheer number of tourists, and on the rare occasion when you saw a lion, the poor animal was instantly surrounded by dozens of minibuses. One felt -- felt strongly -- that there was something degrading about the experience, that too many people were chasing too few animals, and in the process undermining the fragile ecology and turning the park into a dust bowl.Now, the pendulum seems to have begun swinging in the opposite direction (though perhaps too late for Amboseli, alas). In both Kenya and Tanzania, new ideas are taking hold -- of smaller, more luxurious lodges, of placing less reliance on the old idea of constantly moving the tourist around in a vehicle, of a tourism of quality, as opposed to quantity.Our first hint of this change came when we were planning our December safari for four -- my wife, Margaret, and I with friends and neighbors of ours in Dutchess County, Jeff and Sue Lynn. We arranged the trip through Abercrombie & Kent. We wanted very much to go back to Tanzania, especially the Ngorongoro Crater and the Serengeti during the great migration, which we had done several times before.On our first trip, 15 years ago, conditions had been primitive, and the food supply seemed to consist mostly of carrots and eggs. Gradually, over the years, things got better, but Tanzania was still dramatically less comfortable than Kenya, with a bureaucracy that made getting in and out of the country something of a challenge. But today, we were assured, things had changed. A South African hotel consortium had built a new lodge a couple of years ago on the rim of the Ngorongoro Crater that was, to put it bluntly, ''over the top.''''Yeah, yeah,'' we grumbled, but in the face of a barrage of enthusiasm from Abercrombie & Kent, booked into Ngorongoro Crater Lodge.Our first surprise, flying in a charter plane from Kenya into Tanzania, was that everyone at Kilimanjaro International Airport was pleasant, helpful and friendly. On previous visits, it had been like flying into East Germany in the old days, particularly coming from Kenya, toward which there was great suspicion and hostility, but the airport is now pretty cheerful, with well-stocked souvenir shops and smiling bureaucrats. Our luggage went through customs without a search and was loaded onto our chartered Tanzanian Beechcraft. An hour later we landed on the rim of the crater; the airstrip here is often foggy, so many guests of the Ngorongoro Crater Lodge land at Lake Manyara, two and a half hours away at ''game drive speed.'' (During our own 20-minute drive to the lodge, we saw one big old tusker in a field by himself, right next to the road).The lodge was set so close to the rim of the crater that it looked as if it might slide 2,000 feet or so into it; it's as if somebody had built a hotel on the rim of the Grand Canyon. At first sight it has a certain Moorish feel, since it is bordered by a crenelated high pink stucco wall that reminds one rather of those at Fez or Marrakech, but there is an air of fantasy to it, a slightly dotty passion for odd shapes and forms that is more Hollywood than Morocco. Cecil B. De Mille  would have loved this place!A very nice young man meets us and takes us into the lodge's main building -- or one of the main buildings, for, as he explains it, the lodge is built on three different levels, and divided into three separate camps, two with 12 suites each and one with six; each camp has its own central house for dinner, drinks and lounging. Vast windows overlook a sheer drop to the crater floor and a panorama that stretches forever.Scarcely less breathtaking is the decor, to which the phrase ''over the top'' scarcely does justice. In fact, not since I was in Cher's house in Malibu have I been anywhere so extraordinary.Here, competing for attention, are giant fireplaces, African sculpture and weapons, fine bronzes, English country furniture, extravagant and very beautiful tile work in the Moorish tradition, paneled walls in the sumptuous and elegant living room, where everybody gathers for drinks and hors d'oeuvres before dinner, a dining room full of light, air, unexpected corners and fireplaces and tables set with an elegance that would be sumptuous in Paris or New York. The men's room is so unexpected and luxuriously decorated that we all go to visit it -- it's as if Versace had been asked to design a urinal -- only to discover that the ladies' room is even more baroque.A short walk down to our own bungalow -- avoiding the traces of Cape buffalo that have found their way around the wall at night -- brings us to a round hut, in the African tradition, with another splendid view. Outside, beautifully hand-carved wooden doors, the whole thing like a Hollywood set for the chief's hut in a movie; inside, weird ''Phantom of the Opera'' excess: a king-sized bed with a vast carved headboard, so you can lie in bed and look out over the crater; magnificent antique furniture, all veneer and ormolu; high ceilings; vast, velvet drapes; a huge crystal chandelier, and strange, tiny windows on the non-crater sides, with elaborate carved shutters. There is a silver tray with an antique crystal decanter of sherry and antique crystal goblets -- drinks are on the house, we have been told, except for Champagne and Cognac. Furniture is upholstered either in soft leather or dark velvet, with pillows everywhere. The interior design of the hut looks like -- well, frankly, Malibu, but out the window one can see Africa stretching before one's eyes.More surprises. A big old-fashioned bathtub in the middle of the bedroom floor (and even more surprising, scads of hot water, day and night, and thick, luxurious towels), so you can soak and look out over the crater and the far horizon, a shower big enough for half a dozen people, with a tiled seat like that in a Turkish bath, a big fireplace (which is kept burning by unseen hands), magnificent parquet floors, one-size-fits-all Wellies in case of mud or rain. Everything, in short, has been thought of.We have our own valet, who is responsible for our well-being -- looks after the bungalow, brings snacks and drinks, waits on us at meals and summons security guards at night when we want to go to and from the main house, just in case there are buffalo or worse around. And all this is before we've had a meal.But it's the meal that astonishes. The chef (from Claridge's in London, if you please) wrings a miracle out of thin air three times a day (three and a half, if you include teatime): wonderful cheeses, glorious duck, great soups, arrays of exotic fruit and lighter-than-air pastry. Every meal is a surprise and delight, perfectly presented and served, accompanied by excellent South African wines. Anything we want, he will prepare for us, he assures us; we shouldn't feel confined to the menu.It is like being at sea, first class on the old Queen Elizabeth or the Queen Mary, and by the end of lunch it is all we can do to waddle up to the gift shop (very expensive, world-class shopping), back to our beds for a nap, then, after tea, down into the crater itself to see some game.The crater and its game are something special and wonderful, and worth coming halfway round the world to see. Just in case we get hungry en route, the hotel's game driver takes with him a thermos of coffee, iced soft drinks, the kitchen's latest batch of freshly baked biscuits and cookies -- he is as concerned about our comfort as he is to get us close to a lion or a leopard.Dinner is served at 8, and we leave ourselves an hour to join our fellow guests and the management for drinks before the fire in the big living room. There is a wonderful array of sherries and madeiras in cut-glass decanters accompanied by freshly baked hot cheese straws. In the dining room, the fireplaces have been lighted, the lighting is subdued and the African sculpture in alcoves illuminated from above so they stand out with startling effect.No effort is made to push guests into matey conversation -- some are standoffish, some not, to begin with -- but the atmosphere and the charm of the management team soon break down any initial reserve or language barriers, and by dinnertime people are exchanging business cards, scribbled addresses (''If you're ever in Cape Town . . .''), photographs of game and, of course, safari stories.There are several South Africans visiting the lodge from the company that owns it, the mysteriously named Conservation Corporation Africa, which runs equally luxurious and unusual lodges and camps in South Africa, Zimbabwe and East Africa.However unique the Ngorongoro Crater Lodge is, it is also the cutting edge of a trend. Before this sybaritic stay in Tanzania, we had visited Kenya, and found one of East Africa's classic camps also in the course of change, and maintaining its ecological integrity in the process. Wilderness Trails at Lewa Downs near Isiolo, belonging to the energetic and charming Craig family, is in the process of being upgraded to luxury status. Its original six rooms are in three cottages, with each cottage sharing a sitting room and verandah. Two newer cottages have only one bedroom apiece, and more privacy; a separate house an hour's drive away is also available for rent.While the Craigs do not go in for elaborate decor or crystal chandeliers, they now have perhaps the most beautiful swimming pool in the world, one edge of which simply vanishes into space, above a deep canyon through which lion and leopard occasionally prowl. And the wonderful food, served outdoors in great style, will leave you looking for a Stairmaster.Fortunately, since the Craigs own 45,000 acres of the surrounding countryside, you can go on guided and guarded walks to work off some of the food, or on morning horseback safaris, ending in a delicious breakfast cooked out in the bush, so you can eat your eggs and bacon watching zebra and even rhino watching you, then walk back.Accommodations are in thatched cottages, with lovely sitting rooms with open fireplaces and your own self-service bar. The Craigs are a big family, with the elder Craigs still very much involved in the daily doings, and their two sons and their families running things now. They are ideal hosts -- friendly without getting in your way -- and endlessly interesting, with very nice children and dogs, so it's like staying in an English country house, right down to the hearty teas and the coffee and brandy in front of the fireplace at night.The wildlife is hard to beat, particularly when it comes to rhinoceros, which are increasingly rare and hard to see elsewhere, but which at Lewa Downs are given sanctuary and wander close to the house in all ages and sizes. The vegetable garden is well worth seeing, and the house is set in beautiful English gardens, filled with magnificent furniture from African woods made in their own workshops.Here, too, in less flamboyant style, are smaller, more deluxe accommodations, and an effort to put the visitor in a place where the game goes by, rather than going in pursuit of it. If the ecology, and the game itself, is to survive in the wild, smaller and on foot is better, with or without the luxury component. The alternative, perhaps -- God forbid! -- will be game theme parks.In this sense, the Craigs may have set a precedent. From the beginning, after Kenyan independence in 1963, when they opened their house to visitors, they have had game walks, game rides on horseback, bird walks and bird watching outposts for marsh birds. The only game drives are in open four-wheel-drive vehicles.The experience of seeing the animals, unforgettable however many times you do it, is only improved by getting at once closer to them and to nature, and is not diminished by luxury at the end of the day. Nor would it be diminished by a simple tent on the veldt. The point is not luxury, but reducing the number of visitors and vehicles. To see, as we did, a leopard close up in broad daylight -- to watch it for nearly an hour -- is more deeply satisfying than all the museums in the world.If you go in styleReservations were made through Abercrombie & Kent International, 1520 Kensington Road, Suite 212, Oak Brook, Ill. 60523; (800) 323-7308.Ngorongoro Crater Lodge, Tanzania, c/o Conservation Corporation Africa, (27-11) 809-4300, fax (27-11) 809-4400. One of several lodges at the crater rim. Nightly rates range from $800 to $1,000 for two in a double room, depending on the accommodation and the season, including meals, house wines and spirits, beer and butler service. Park fees and transfers are extra, as are cellar wines, Cognac and Champagne.Wilderness Trails, Lewa Downs, Kenya, is represented by Bush Homes of East Africa in Nairobi, (254-2) 571661, fax (254-2) 571665; www.bush-homes.co.ke. Rates start at $660 a night for two in a room, including meals, table wine, beer and activities.United States visitors require a visa to visit Tanzania but not Kenya if vacationing there for less than 30 days. For details:Consulate General of Kenya, 424 Madison Avenue, New York, N.Y. 10017; (212) 486-1300.Tanzanian Mission to the United Nations, 205 East 42nd Street, 13th Floor, New York, N.Y. 10017; (212) 972-9160.MICHAEL KORDA is editor in chief of Simon & Schuster.
What is your deepest thought about, say, coffee? Not Colombian versus Sumatran, latte or espresso; forget that. What I want to know is, when you are thinking about coffee, really thinking, what do you think about? It doesn't really matter. I already know what you think, and besides, you're wrong.I learned the right answer after visiting the Tuxedo Park mansion of Clotaire Rapaille, the French-born medical anthropologist whose method for mining our covert thoughts has compelled nearly 50 Fortune 100 C.E.O.'s to dig deeply into their treasuries. In a field crowded with tired methods for surveying the desires of the American heart and mind -- scenario planning, observational research, focus grouping, ethnographics, content analysis, motive critiquing and Markov chains -- Rapaille's technique of ''archetype research'' is a revival of the psychoanalytic methods popular in the 1950's and 1960's. Pioneered by the Viennese psychologist Ernest Dichter, this technique doesn't bother to ask what people want, but why. Early on, Dichter persuaded Esso to forgo traditional descriptions of its product's superiority by tapping into Americans' aggressive motives for owning cars in the first place. Dichter was behind the phrase, ''Put a tiger in your tank.''What is your deepest thought about, say, coffee? Not Colombian versus Sumatran, latte or espresso; forget that. What I want to know is, when you are thinking about coffee, really thinking, what do you think about? It doesn't really matter. I already know what you think, and besides, you're wrong.I learned the right answer after visiting the Tuxedo Park mansion of Clotaire Rapaille, the French-born medical anthropologist whose method for mining our covert thoughts has compelled nearly 50 Fortune 100 C.E.O.'s to dig deeply into their treasuries. In a field crowded with tired methods for surveying the desires of the American heart and mind -- scenario planning, observational research, focus grouping, ethnographics, content analysis, motive critiquing and Markov chains -- Rapaille's technique of ''archetype research'' is a revival of the psychoanalytic methods popular in the 1950's and 1960's. Pioneered by the Viennese psychologist Ernest Dichter, this technique doesn't bother to ask what people want, but why. Early on, Dichter persuaded Esso to forgo traditional descriptions of its product's superiority by tapping into Americans' aggressive motives for owning cars in the first place. Dichter was behind the phrase, ''Put a tiger in your tank.''While pollsters and others have long sought to track the anarchic flight of our national whimsy, Rapaille's refinement of Dichter's method has a more ambitious goal, which he compares to a psychoanalytic human genome project. He intends to describe all the lasting characteristics that generate the choices we Americans make, year after year, trend after trend. Call it inner-life profiling.In the old days (first Clinton administration), polling was used to search for trends in opinions about anything -- lawn mowers, gay adoption, Newt Gingrich, EggBeaters. Rapaille rejects such methods as prehistoric. ''That's all content,'' he said dismissively (which is tough, since he sounds vaguely like Inspector Clouseau). ''It will all change next year. What I am doing is a kind of physics. I am trying to uncover the unwritten laws. I am discovering the cultural structure of the American mind.'' Rapaille claims he can describe our deepest associations (and for a price, has) with coffee, money, the presidency, cheese, the sun, whiskey, hospital supplies, recycling, barbecue sauce, life insurance agents, NutraSweet, luggage, the abstraction of making a mistake, the forest, a door.Who are we Americans, deep down? Rapaille believes he has an answer. ''I am compiling a database of cultural codes,'' he said, sitting in a Queen Anne chair beneath the 20-foot ceiling of his 120-year-old home, Lindley Hall. It is now crowded with Rapaille's collection of stately busts of Caesar, Apollo, Napoleon, Moli re. Dressed in a black shirt and tight black pants, he ordered a domestic to fetch us some morning beverages. He ran his hand through a Jeffersonian blast of reddish flyaway hair. Rapaille thinks of himself as a latter-day Amerigo Vespucci, a cartographer and pilot major, bringing maps of a Mundus Novus back to his patrons -- Ford, Procter & Gamble, Seagram, AT&T, General Mills, Birds Eye -- in order to better outfit the next wave of caravels, eager to colonize this place once thought to be dark, unachievable and obscure.Now, about the coffee.Rapaille explained that he first discovered the route to our secret feelings about coffee 30 years ago, when he worked in Switzerland with autistic children. Why was it, Rapaille wondered, that these children, who were quite smart, had such difficulty learning language? The answer is now fairly accepted linguistic theory: the children lacked an emotional life, and emotion is understood to be the linguistic glue that keeps meaning alive in our minds. Nearly every word we know has an emotional resonance that, as we grow up, sinks into the unconscious.With this idea, Rapaille then posited that these sublimated emotional memories occupied a place between each individual's unconscious (Freud) and the collective unconscious of the entire human race (Jung). It is a ''cultural unconscious,'' which is closely associated with language and therefore differs from culture to culture, country to country.''When a man and woman have a child, they always have a human being,'' he said. ''And when an American man and woman have a child they always have a little American. But there are no genes for 'American.''' So culture is completely acquired.''There is always a first time we imprint something, and when we do we create mental highways. We make use of these highways all the time and they become unconscious. I realized in Switzerland that it was different from one culture to another.''There is a little window of time when you are young in which to imprint the idea of 'coffee,''' Rapaille said, ''and so coffee in Italy is not the same as coffee in Germany.'' He laughed quietly to himself; this line gets big yuks in Milan. ''And very different in America.'' In Europe, the aroma of coffee can be smelled on nearly every block; in America, the aroma of coffee is almost uniformly experienced indoors.''It occurs usually around age 2 in America, when your mother is cooking breakfast,'' Rapaille said. ''Your mother loves you. She is going to feed you. You are happy,'' Rapaille said. ''This is the American code for coffee's aroma: 'home.''' So when you smell coffee, Rapaille said, your mind summons up childhood sensations of cozy domesticity. He later found further evidence to corroborate his finding: an American real estate agent told him that a common trick before entering a house with a client was to brew a pot of coffee because ''then it becomes a home.'' Rapaille said that 10 years ago he presented a more detailed account of this work to the makers of Folger's.''I told the people at Procter & Gamble, 'Don't care about the taste,''' Rapaille said. ''You have to own the aroma. The commercial we designed has a young man in an army uniform arriving home in the early morning. He goes directly to the kitchen and kkssshtt, opens the package. As the aroma goes upstairs, we see the mother open her eyes, smile and what does she say? She says, 'He's home!'''Rapaille sipped his fresh-brewed coffee.''Folger's has been using that study for more than 10 years, and it's still working,'' he said. ''So that is what I do. I break the code.''Discovering these codes requires a process not all that different from dream analysis. For instance, Rapaille was asked by a French company to find out how the American mind thought about ''cheese'' as compared with the French mind. Most researchers would conduct focus groups; they would ask questions and record responses. That would be a mistake, for the responses, Rapaille believes, would reflect back simply what people think they should say: taste, quality, price.Such straightforward questions -- about cheese or anything else -- are aimed at the cortex, the seat of the intellect. Rapaille directs his queries to what he calls the ''reptilian'' part of the brain, the home of smells, violence, sex, primal emotion.''See, I don't believe what people say,'' he explained, taking me to a room on the second floor. We sat before a Hitachi screen roughly the size of a Volkswagen and watched various tapes of his sessions. Typically, he begins a project by taking a group of about 20 people through a series of word-association games. Rapaille writes the words on a board and then asks the group to identify themes that unite the words. Finally, he has them tell childlike stories based on the concepts appearing on the board. Essentially, he wants to generate lots of little stories. The final session concludes with Rapaille asking his subjects to lie on the floor, some under blankets, some with pillows. In the background, he plays droning massage music for 20 minutes, until the active brain waves of the alert mind calm down to that tranquil moment just before sleep. Having spent the whole day activating their minds with every possible association with ''cheese,'' they are ready to call up the golden nugget Rapaille seeks: the ur-cheese memory.''I am taking you on a train trip,'' he says on one of his tapes. On the screen, his playful French accent carries members of the group back to their teenage years and then to childhood. No one speaks or moves. Finally, he asks them to go back to their earliest memory of cheese. It doesn't have to be the first time they tasted cheese, but the first time they consciously experienced it -- got near it, held it, smelled it, touched it. Then, gingerly, he brings them out of the near-slumber and, as with a dream, asks them to write down the story of what they remembered about cheese. He examines all the collected stories, and when he sees repetition in the narrative, he knows he has found the archetypal association.''In France,'' he said, switching off the television, ''the code for cheese is 'alive.' It is young, mature, old cheese. You smell it to tell the age. When you go to America, cheese is 'dead.' The first impression in America is that smell doesn't matter. Cheese is put in the refrigerator. In France, never. You would not put a cat in the refrigerator because it is alive. But in America, in the refrigerator, in the morgue; you put cheese in plastic like a body bag. It is legally dead, and scientifically dead, by being pasteurized.''The French company selling the cheese had a French commercial showing a woman smelling the cheese, opening it, poking it, touching the Camembert. You could see fingerprints on it. A love affair. Americans saw this commercial in a test and thought it was disgusting. Americans want safety. They want their cheese dead.''Another cultural contrast can be found in Euro Disney. When it opened, Europeans hated it. The park lost $1 million a day. Rapaille explained its immediate failure and subsequent success to a shift in understanding the deeper meaning of ''freedom'' in both places.''Freedom exists on an axis,'' he said. ''There is a second element to it, and in America the other side of freedom is prohibition. They are in tension all the time. Prohibition of alcohol. Today, political correctness.'' Disney World's Magic Kingdom celebrates the cultural concept of liberty while imposing harsh limits on the place itself. No pets are allowed in the restaurants. No smoking. No drinking. The female staff may not wear miniskirts. In Europe, these limitations prompted disgust.''Compare that to the French, where they have freedom but no prohibition,'' he said. ''You can't stop the French from doing anything. A dress code? No earrings, no alcohol, no dogs? The result was that no one came. Why? Because in Paris, the other side of freedom is 'privilege.' The French Revolution was not about abolishing privilege but about killing people with privilege so the revolutionaries could have it themselves.'' Among the major changes Euro Disney made to stem its disastrous losses were special areas for smoking, dogs and drinking. ''So you see islands of privilege,'' Rapaille said. Now the place operates at a profit and is one of Paris's most popular spots.Rapaille can go on, hiking across the landscape of our associations, uprooting one hidden realm of meaning after another. For Americans, he told me, ''trees'' are ''human beings.'' We hug them. They are raised in nurseries. They age into ''old growth.'' With this information, he persuaded the Timber Association of California (timber reminded people of the logger's cry, Timber!, which made them think of ''killing'') to change its name to the California Forestry Association. The group's public imagery ceased to feature fresh-cut logs (''dead bodies'') and avoided defenses of clear-cutting (''holocaust''). An ad that showed a man carrying a ''baby tree'' by the ''hair'' and planting it by stomping it with his boots was replaced with a woman cradling the burlap diaper of a sapling, planting it with her hands, watering it and promising to return.Once you understand the Rapaille method, you start noticing just how often in our mediated day some emotional depth charge is set to go off -- whether it's a television commercial, a Clinton speech or a Hollywood film. For years, there was a certain telephone commercial that had me by the throat. I am talking about that damp little melodrama involving a middle-aged black woman sitting in a chair as she receives her first phone call from her son, newly arrived to his dorm in college. I simply had to watch it. If it came on in a room, I would turn away from what I was doing or whomever I was talking to in order to experience this tiny emotional whippet. Now I see that it wasn't merely the surface sentimentality of the mother-son bond that was plucking my heartstrings. A Rapaille reading would interpret this vignette as an immigrant morality story tailored for the American psyche -- where blackness stood for our country's ongoing sense of striving to better yourself; college was the signifier for having made it. This wasn't sentiment; it was patriotism.Popular divination is nothing new, of course. But for the longest time, it was considered a kind of mystical art. In the last century, William McKinley's ability to sense shifts in the public mood caused a political foe to note that the president had his ear so close to the ground it was full of grasshoppers.These days, gut instinct has been replaced by hard science. In the back of the new soft-cover edition of Dick Morris's book, ''Behind the Oval Office,'' he includes nearly 300 pages of polling data, proposed ads and policy suggestions prepared for Clinton in 1995 and 1996. It's apparent that scarcely an adjective fell from the president's lips without being tested for its emotional voltage. Considering what Clinton survived in recent history, it's hard to argue with polling's efficacy.Although Rapaille, in his own way, will. Even though he admits that Clinton's success can be laid to his talent for staying five minutes behind our collective caprice, Rapaille believes that deeper cultural forces kept Clinton's popularity improbably high. Fortunately for the president, Rapaille said, Americans aren't all that enamored of perfection.Back in the Bush era, when Americans feared that the Japanese might take over, Rapaille was summoned by a corporate sponsor to find out how the United States could adapt Asian high-efficiency management concepts, like ''do it right the first time.''''If only we could be more like the Japanese, is what everyone was saying,'' Rapaille explained as he walked me into the drawing room past a Louis XIV bust illuminated by its own small lamp. Outside, through grand French doors, I could see Lake Tuxedo shimmering on a warm spring day. We sat at a small table and took lunch beneath a wall-size ancient tapestry depicting Solomon's dark brow, contemplative in judgment.''But what we found was that Americans unconsciously didn't want to do it right the first time,'' he continued. ''Now, the question was, why?'' To find the answer, Rapaille and his team set up an experiment with a group of American executives schooled in a management style known as ''zero defects.'' Rapaille told the group to find a way to scale a wall without touching it. If members touched the wall, they would be ''dead.'' He also gave the group instructions for achieving the goal. The Americans ignored the instructions and started screwing up.''Of course, they immediately died,'' Rapaille said. ''They were so upset. But I told them, 'Look here, in the instructions; what does it say?' And they would complain that they hadn't read the instructions. I would say, 'Too bad, there you have it, you are dead.' But they were so upset, they stayed up all night and designed a new way to solve the problem.''So, Rapaille concluded, Americans might say they want to 'do it right the first time,' but they don't really mean it. Americans like mistakes and actually delight in making them because it means that they can keep on improving. ''Zero defects in America,'' Rapaille said. ''This is perfection, and perfection is death. There is nothing else. What Americans want is more breakthroughs. That's why computers are so powerful. Six months later, you can throw yours out because there is a newer one, a better one. Americans love that. The worst thing is when we say, 'It's perfect, the end.' Americans hate that. That's the German attitude. Germans created the standard for beer 300 years ago. It's done. Perfect. So all you do is try to get as close as possible to that perfection. Well, that's completely un-American.''He sipped a glass of red wine and merrily segued into the greatest Rapaillesian character in recent memory.''Bill Clinton fascinates me,'' he said. ''Americans loved him. Why? Because Clinton made mistakes. It means he was learning something and getting better.'' Rapaille said that in the late 80's, Lee Atwater, then working for George Bush p re, hired him to do an archetype study of the presidency. Though financing ran out before Rapaille could complete his work, he was able to gather useful material in the word-association sessions. Participants compared the chief executive to a ''movie character''; they said he could ''make people see things.'' From this, Rapaille was able to identify the core emotional nubbin. Fatherhood? Celebration? Nationalism? No, no. The presidency is: ''cheap entertainment.''''What does he make, $200,000 a year?'' Rapaille asked. ''That's a lot cheaper than Oprah.'' This code is a problem for the two probable presidential nominees.''Gore is boring,'' Rapaille said. ''This is a real problem. Bush is not very intelligent. But then, who cares? Americans have never been impressed by intellectuals.'' So Bush's mediocre mind is not nearly the handicap that Gore's leaden personality is. Rapaille gives Bush the edge, but neither one of them interests him much. He openly pines for Bill Clinton the icon (not the politician). Mistakes weren't Clinton's only asset. America's code, according to Rapaille, is built around ''hope.'' That's why Clinton's slogan in 1992 ''was simply brilliant,'' Rapaille said. ''I still believe in a place called ''hope.''' He's almost a genius.'' Clinton had instinctively hit the grand slam of presidential codes. Mistakes. Cheap Entertainment. Hope.No wonder he's still in office.Rapaille plans one day to distill the essential elements of the American character in a book. ''I have a manuscript called 'Decoding the American Mind,''' he said, which will take his findings and analysis beyond his corporate patrons to the source -- American readers. Although the vast majority of Americans continue to define the national character via real estate metaphors -- frontier, panorama, province -- Rapaille believes that we will ultimately accept his Freudian interpretation of our inner life. For him, it is not a static landscape but something fluid and roiling. ''The inner life of America is not a place -- Canada is a place,'' he explained. ''Maybe the best place in the world. But if you are Canadian and you have a dream, you leave. Why? Because America is not a place. It is a dream.''Jack Hitt is a contributing writer for the magazine. His most recent article was on the new generation of sexual enhancement drugs.
SOMETIMES, even the professionals have to avert their eyes.''I could barely watch it,'' Vance DeGeneres, a veteran comedy writer and performer on Comedy Central's ''Daily Show,'' said of the incident on ''Late Show with David Letterman.''  ''It was almost like watching those films where they're clubbing the baby seal to death.''SOMETIMES, even the professionals have to avert their eyes.''I could barely watch it,'' Vance DeGeneres, a veteran comedy writer and performer on Comedy Central's ''Daily Show,'' said of the incident on ''Late Show with David Letterman.''  ''It was almost like watching those films where they're clubbing the baby seal to death.''The ''it'' was, perhaps, the most uncomfortable moment of political humor of the television season. After weeks of goading by Mr. Letterman, Gov. George W. Bush of Texas agreed to appear by satellite on his show, an encounter that was, by most assessments, a disaster for the Republican presidential candidate. Mr. Bush, hampered by the split-second time delay and projecting an air of being led on a forced march, offered one lame quip after another, including a pun about Mr. Letterman's recent heart operation so strained that it left the host staring, mortified, into the camera.The episode was instructive not only about how truly dangerous a tete-a-tete with a witty talk-show host can be, but also about how much clout television comedy wields in the shaping of political perceptions. In a recent survey by the Pew Research Center for the People and the Press, roughly one in 10 Americans said they routinely gleaned information about the presidential race from late-night talk shows like the ones presided over by Mr. Letterman and Jay Leno; nearly as many said that they regularly obtained political news from other shows, like ''Saturday Night Live'' and ''Politically Incorrect,''  ''The Daily Show'' and ''Mad TV.''The proportion of viewers admitting that they get their politics from television comedy may not be overwhelming. But considering that the 1996 presidential election was decided by a mere eight percentage points, what each and every consumer of comedy on television takes away from the experience can be highly significant.''I tend to believe that,'' said Dick Blasucci, the executive producer of ''Mad TV,'' Fox's Saturday night comedy show. ''Look: what killed Dan Quayle was the beating up by Jay Leno and others. I'm not saying they were taking sides, but I do think that kind of stuff leaves an impression.''Having a serious impact on real events is, of course, the last thing on the minds of most of the writers and performers of political satire on television. ''I just want the politicians and the people who watch our show to know that this is a place where the buck honestly stops,'' said Bill Maher, the no-nonsense host of ''Politically Incorrect,'' ABC's freewheeling after-hours talkfest. Still, as the Bush appearance on ''Letterman'' illustrates, political comedy relies ever more intensively on the willing (and in some instances unwitting) participation of actual officeholders and officeseekers.That is attributable, at least in part, to the blurring of the line between politics and entertainment, a boundary that has been fading since the psychedelic days of ''Rowan and Martin's Laugh-In,'' on which, in 1968, a dour politician by the name of Richard M. Nixon, in a startling cameo, uttered the show's stock phrase ''Sock it to me?'' into the camera. If self-mockery once seemed a bit of an indignity for politicians, nowadays they jump at the chance to make 'em laugh. Members of Congress appear as panelists along with country singers, rappers and actors on ''Politically Incorrect.'' Former presidential candidates -- even former presidents -- show up at benefits as agreeable sidekicks to their ''Saturday Night Live'' impersonators.C-Span has gotten into the act, broadcasting an annual evening of stand-up comedy from Washington, in which reporters like Walter Shapiro of USA Today and lawmakers like Senator Joseph Lieberman of Connecticut perform their 10 minutes of shtick. And in what may just be the slyest marriage of politics and comedy on television, ''The Daily Show,'' the satirical four-nights-a-week news and talk show with the comedian Jon Stewart as host, has hired the former Senator Bob Dole as an election-year commentator. (Mr. Dole declined an interview request.)''The Daily Show,'' with its deadpan reports from a comic corral of field correspondents and sidelong glances at the day's headlines, has developed a reputation for offering some of the shrewdest political foolery on the small screen. ''We had a blast working with them,'' said Todd Harris, who served as press secretary for the New Hampshire primary campaign of Senator John McCain, to which ''The Daily Show'' attached one of its performers, Steve Carell, for a mock news piece.''After the piece came out, we had a tape of it on board the Straight Talk Express,'' Mr. Harris said, ''and every couple of weeks or so Senator McCain stopped everything and said, 'Let's watch the Comedy Central tape!' ''The segment followed Mr. Carell's exploits as he tried vainly to get a seat on Mr. McCain's bus, a conceit that was inherently funny: Mr. McCain had become instantly legendary for the generous access he provided to the press. ''So there was a very humorous irony there,'' Mr. Harris said, ''but there was also a deeper irony in the fact that we were a serious presidential campaign, allowing them to partake of this irony.''It was just the sort of piece that ''The Daily Show,'' and its ongoing ''Indecision 2000'' election coverage, revels in. For the past 16 months, the program's anchor desk has been manned by Mr. Stewart. (Before that, it was the perch of Craig Kilborn, whose talk show now follows Mr. Letterman's on CBS.) Mr. Stewart, along with Madeleine Smithberg, the executive producer, oversees a staff of 60 writers, producers and technicians who work out of the show's headquarters on a desolate midtown Manhattan side street a block from the West Side Highway. The 30-minute program is a kind of comic cocktail of reality and parody. ''We are a fake news organization,'' Mr. Stewart said, ''but we feel the ups and downs that real news organizations feel.''Mr. Stewart sets a benign tone with political guests. There is a compassionate quality to his interviews that reflects a higher level of affection for politics than that displayed in the cranky irreverence of Mr. Letterman or the jokey, disconnected chatter of Mr. Leno. ''I believe if these people come on our show, they should have the respect they're owed by virtue of the office they're in,'' Mr. Stewart said. ''I want them to feel comfortable.''The show, in fact, has gained a following in political circles for its hipness and sense of fun. ''He is so fast, if he were a shortstop, he would pick up everything,'' Representative Dennis J. Kucinich, a Cleveland Democrat, said of Mr. Stewart. ''And he realizes that he is prospecting in very rich territory.''On ''Politically Incorrect,'' Mr. Maher's style is decidedly less ingratiating: he puts everyone on the hot seat. ''Not that I insult the movie stars, but my show lives on the premise that I never pull a punch,'' he said. As a result, he says, some potential political guests remain leery.''Dan Quayle was booked on our show recently and then pulled out,'' Mr. Maher said, adding that he was told that ''something I said'' about the former vice president had upset his handlers and that ''they wanted me to apologize.'' Mr. Maher declined.He is aware, though, that his blunt style has power. Asked, for instance, if he had invited Mr. Bush on his show, Mr. Maher laughed at the improbability of such an appearance. ''I've been so hard on him,'' he said. (He added that he was not a fan of Vice President Al Gore, either.)IT may be just as well that Mr. Bush steers clear of the program, given his performance on ''Letterman,'' a show that has become a kind of political proving ground. Gerard Mulligan, a longtime staff writer, said that Mr. Letterman ''discovered inadvertently'' just how gravely candidates respond to his comic denunciations. For weeks, he complained on the air about Hillary Rodham Clinton's refusal to appear on the show after announcing her campaign for the Senate seat from New York.''He said, 'The road to the Senate goes through this chair,' a spur-of-the-moment thing,'' Mr. Mulligan recalled. Soon enough, Mrs. Clinton was seated opposite Mr. Letterman and submitting to a pop civics test about New York, in which the host quizzed her on the name of the state tree and bird.It is a measure of how important a sense of humor on camera has become to political discourse that candidates feel real pressure to perform. As Mrs. Clinton all but said to Mr. Letterman, her appearance on his show was as obligatory a part of her race as a whistle-stop tour of the Western tier. The tacit and attractive acknowledgment to voters in such a booking is that a candidate is serious about running but not so serious about themselves. ''You have to prove you're a good sport,'' Mr. Mulligan said.The notion of a political personality able to give as good as he gets was what appealed to ''Daily Show'' honchos about signing on Mr. Dole, who will be called on for commentary on the program's continuing coverage of pivotal campaign events. On the campaign trail, Mr. Dole's barbs sometimes came across as a little too sharp, but they are welcomed by Mr. Stewart and company. His hiring brings the phenomenon full circle: the politician as television entertainer about the political process.''My theory on Dole,'' Ms. Smithberg said, ''is that he's like the lawyer who is secretly a musician. Law is the job. And there are these other muscles he always wanted to flex.''TELEVISION/RADIO Peter Marks, a national correspondent for The New York Times, covers media in the presidential campaign.
Jennifer French Bush, the daughter of Virginia Jones Bush of Old Saybrook, Conn., and William Clyde Bush of Bronxville, N.Y., was married yesterday to Thomas Mortimer Evans, the son of Wanda L. Plumer of Upper Marlboro, Md., and George H. Evans of Islesboro, Me. The Rev. Christopher H. Neely, a United Methodist minister, performed the ceremony at Pink Sands, a resort in Dunmore Town, Harbour Island, the Bahamas.Mrs. Evans, 30, was until last summer the head of marketing for Sky Sites, a London company that places advertising in airports. She graduated from the University of Vermont. Her mother is an independent education consultant in New York who helps families place their children in boarding schools, colleges and universities. The bride's father is the president of Cook & Company in Bronxville, an executive recruiting firm, and her stepmother, Patricia S. Cook, is the chairwoman and chief executive of the firm.Jennifer French Bush, the daughter of Virginia Jones Bush of Old Saybrook, Conn., and William Clyde Bush of Bronxville, N.Y., was married yesterday to Thomas Mortimer Evans, the son of Wanda L. Plumer of Upper Marlboro, Md., and George H. Evans of Islesboro, Me. The Rev. Christopher H. Neely, a United Methodist minister, performed the ceremony at Pink Sands, a resort in Dunmore Town, Harbour Island, the Bahamas.Mrs. Evans, 30, was until last summer the head of marketing for Sky Sites, a London company that places advertising in airports. She graduated from the University of Vermont. Her mother is an independent education consultant in New York who helps families place their children in boarding schools, colleges and universities. The bride's father is the president of Cook & Company in Bronxville, an executive recruiting firm, and her stepmother, Patricia S. Cook, is the chairwoman and chief executive of the firm.Mr. Evans, 30, is a regional director in Sao Paulo, Brazil, for Grey Advertising. He graduated from Middlebury College. His mother is the manager of research and development for the Economic Development Commission of Prince George's County, in Lanham, Md. His father owns and operates Islesboro Marine, a sailboat repair and drydocking business there.WEDDINGS
An opinionated guide to cultural and recreational goings-on around the state this week. Items may be submitted by mail to On the Towns, Sunday New Jersey Section, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y. 10036; by fax to (212) 556-7219, or by e-mail to njtowns@nytimes.com.MUSICBICKFORD THEATER Paris Washboard, jazz quartet. Tomorrow at 8 p.m. Tickets: $12. Morris Museum, 6 Normandy Heights Road, Morristown. (973) 538-0454.An opinionated guide to cultural and recreational goings-on around the state this week. Items may be submitted by mail to On the Towns, Sunday New Jersey Section, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y. 10036; by fax to (212) 556-7219, or by e-mail to njtowns@nytimes.com.MUSICBICKFORD THEATER Paris Washboard, jazz quartet. Tomorrow at 8 p.m. Tickets: $12. Morris Museum, 6 Normandy Heights Road, Morristown. (973) 538-0454.THE CORNERSTONE ''Fine Food . . . and all that Jazz.'' Kenny Davern Quartet with John Bunch. Wednesday, 7:30 p.m. to 11:30 p.m. Alan Fardham Quartet, with Randy Sandke. Friday, 9 p.m. to 1 a.m. Pete Yellin Quartet. Saturday, 9 p.m. to 1 a.m. 25 New Street, Metuchen. (732) 549-5306.COUNT BASIE THEATER New Jersey Symphony Orchestra presents Haydn's ''Creation,'' featuring Margaret Cahn, soprano, and Zdenek Macal, conductor. Saturday at 8:30 p.m. Tickets: $12 to $42. 99 Monmouth Street, Red Bank. (732) 842-9000.DREW UNIVERSITY Drew Cabaret concert to benefit the Center for Holocaust Study. Today at 3:30 p.m. Tickets: Starting at $85. Baldwin Gymnasium, Madison Avenue, Madison. (973) 408-3600.JOHN HARMS CENTER FOR THE ARTS ''An Evening With Marvin Hamlisch.'' Today at 3 p.m. Tickets: $25 to $45. The New Jersey Symphony Orchestra presents Haydn's ''Creation,'' featuring Margaret Cahn, soprano, and Zdenek Macal, conductor. Thursday at 8 p.m. Tickets: $12 to $42. 30 North Van Brunt Street, Englewood. (201) 567-3600.McCARTER THEATER Beaux Arts Trio performs works by Beethoven, Shostakovich and Brahms, featuring Menahem Pressler, pianist; Young Uck-Kim, violinist; Antonio Meneses, cellist. Tomorrow at 8 p.m. Tickets: $25 and $25. 91 University Place, Princeton. (609) 258-2787.NEW JERSEY CITY UNIVERSITY The New Jersey City University Contemporary Chamber Ensemble presents a concert of Bozza, Hindemith, Roussel and Schoenberg works. Tomorrow at 8 p.m. Free. Ingalls Recital Hall, Rossey Building, 2039 Kennedy Boulevard, Jersey City. (201) 200-3151.NEW JERSEY PERFORMING ARTS CENTER ''Cellomania.'' Today at 3 p.m. Victoria Theater. Tickets: $25; $15 for students. Prudential Hall. ''100 Years of Strauss Gala,'' featuring Andre Rieu and his Johann Strauss Orchestra. Wednesday at 7:30 p.m. Tickets: $35 to $75. Prudential Hall. ''Jazz for Teens,'' concert of music of Dizzy Gillespie and other jazz greats. Saturday at 12:30 p.m. Tickets: $12; $7 for children. Victoria Theater. ''Jazz Generations,'' featuring Milt Jackson Quartet with the Baby Legends. Saturday at 7 p.m. Tickets:  $18; $9 for children. Victoria Theater. 1 Center Street, Newark. (888) 466-5722.PRINCETON UNIVERSITY RICHARDSON AUDITORIUM New Jersey Youth Symphony Orchestra with Raritan Valley Chorus and New Jersey Youth Symphony Choir in Nelhybel, Puccini, Mendelssohn and Enesco program. Today at 4 p.m. Tickets: $10; $5 for students and older people. ''Composing in the Moment: The Distinguished Teachers of Jazz at Princeton.'' Saturday at 8 p.m. Tickets: $26, $23, $17; $10 for students. New Jersey Symphony Orchestra and the Pro Arte Chorale present Haydn's ''Creation.'' Next Sunday at 3 p.m. Tickets: $12 to $42. Alexander Hall, Princeton. (609) 258-5000.PRINCETON UNIVERSITY TAPLIN AUDITORIUM ''Music 326,'' original student electronic and computer compositions. Tomorrow at 8 p.m. Free. Student recital of Schubert, Schumann, Copland and Berlin works. Wednesday at 8 p.m. Free. Princeton University Juniors and Seniors present a program of new compositions. Thursday at 8 p.m. Free. Georgios Demertzis, violinist; Maria Kitsopoulos, cellist and Maria Asteriadou, pianist, perform works by Nikos Skalkottas. Friday at 8 p.m. Taplin Auditorium, Fine Hall. Washington Road, Princeton. (609) 258-4239.RAMAPO COLLEGE ''Salute to Louis Armstrong,'' with Byron Stipling, jazz trumpeter. Thursday at 7 p.m. Tickets: $15; $10 for older people; $5 for students. Berrie Center for the Performing Arts, 505 Ramapo Valley Road, Mahwah. (201) 684-7844.RARITAN RIVER MUSIC FESTIVAL 2000 ''Ethos Percussion Group.'' Saturday at 7:30 p.m. Tickets: $17; $10 for students and older people. Old Greenwich Presbyterian Church, Route 173, 2 1/2 miles west of Route 78's Exit 7, Bloomsbury. (908) 213-1100.ROWAN UNIVERSITY David Sanborn, jazz. Saturday at 8 p.m. Tickets: $22.50, $24.50, $27.50. Glassboro Center for the Arts, Route 322, Glassboro. (856) 256-4545.RUTGERS UNIVERSITY - NEW BRUNSWICK New Jersey Youth Symphony performs Act I of Wagner's ''Die Walkure.'' Saturday at 8 p.m. Tickets: $5 to $50. Nicholas Music Center, George Street, Douglass Campus, New Brunswick. (908) 771-5544.RUTGERS UNIVERSITY Amabile String Quartet in a program of works by Mozart, Bartok and Beethoven. Today at 4 p.m. Free. Mason Gross School of the Arts, 33 Livingston Street, New Brunswick. (732) 932-7511.STANHOPE HOUSE Riff, acoustic guitarist. Thursday at 9 p.m. Tickets: $5. Black Widow Blues Band. Friday at 10 p.m. Tickets: $7. Loup Garou, zydeco. Saturday at 10 p.m. Tickets: $10. 45 Main Street, Stanhope. (973) 347-0458.STATE THEATER New Jersey Symphony Orchestra presents a Family Concert. Today at 2 p.m. Tickets: $16 and $11. 15 Livingston Avenue, New Brunswick. (732) 246-7469.STOCKTON PERFORMING ARTS CENTER Bay Atlantic Symphony presents ''Third's the Charm,'' featuring Richard Raymond, pianist, and works by Brahms and Prokofiev. Today at 4 p.m. Tickets: $23 and $18. Jim Leeds Road, Pomona. (609) 652-4527.TRENTON WAR MEMORIAL The Greater Trenton Symphony Orchestra presents ''Viva Italia,'' a program of Bellini, Rossini and Verdi featuring Fernando Raucci, conductor, and Roberto Larussi, tenor. Today at 3 and 7 p.m. Tickets: $15 to $30. Gala concert to benefit the Education Law Center, a statewide advocacy group, with the Spirit Ensemble, and local high school music groups. Thursday at 7:30 p.m Tickets: $20 to $100. Lafayette and Willow Streets, Trenton. (973) 624-3713, ext. 255 or (609) 984-8400.UNION COUNTY ARTS CENTER Patti LuPone in ''Matters of the Heart.'' Friday at 8 p.m. Tickets: $40 to $60. 1601 Irving Street, Rahway. (732) 499-8226.WATCHUNG ARTS CENTER Bob Seeley, jazz pianist. Friday at 8 p.m. Tickets: $12. Watchung Circle, 18 Stirling Road, Watchung. (908) 753-0190.WEST SIDE PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH ENGLEWOOD Bergen Chorale in a concert of Copland and Bach. Saturday at 7:30 p.m. Tickets: $12; $10 for students. Knickerborck Road and Demarest Avenue. (201) 569-3787.WEST SIDE PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH RIDGEWOOD Chorus Angelicus Children's Chorus performs a benefit concert featuring Britten's ''Missa Brevis'' and other works. Today at 4 p.m. Tickets: $60 to $300. South Monroe Street and West Ridgewood Avenue. (201) 652-1966.TheaterAMERICAN STAGE COMPANY ''Ain't Misbehavin','' musical. Through May 21. Wednesdays at 2:30 p.m.; Thursdays at 7:30 p.m.; Fridays and Saturdays at 8 p.m.; and Sundays at 2:30 p.m. and 7 p.m. Tickets: $20 to $30. Becton Hall, Fairleigh Dickinson University, 1000 River Road, Teaneck. (201) 692-7744.ATTIC ENSEMBLE ''All My Sons,'' Arthur Miller's classic drama. Today at 3 p.m. Tickets: $15; $10 for students and older people.  Barrow Mansion, 83 Wayne Street, Jersey City. (201) 413-9200.BERGEN COUNTY PLAYERS Walter Jones's ''1940's Radio Hour,'' musical comedy. Through May 20. Fridays and Saturdays at 8:30 p.m.; Sundays at 2 p.m. Tickets: $15. The Little Firehouse Theater, 298 Kinderkamack Road, Oradell. (201) 261-4200.CIRCLE PLAYERS ''A View From the Bridge,'' drama by Arthur Miller. Through May 20. Friday and Saturday evening performances at 8:30 p.m.; one Sunday matinee today at 2 p.m. Tickets: $12; $11 for students and older people. 416 Victoria Avenue, Piscataway. (732) 968-7555.COMMUNITY THEATER OF MORRISTOWN Shakespeare Live! A Midsummer's Night Dream. Today at 2 p.m. Tickets: $22, $28 and $33. New Jersey Ballet presents ''An Evening of Premieres,'' featuring ''Western Suite,'' ''Memories'' and ''Reflection on the Pond.'' Tickets: $25, $20, $15; $10 for students. 100 South Street, Morristown. (973) 539-8008.CROSSROADS THEATER COMPANY ''Genesis Festival 2000, New Voices in African-American Theater,'' starring Avery Brooks and Joe Morton. ''Mandela, a New Musical.'' Today at 3 p.m. and 7:30 p.m. Tickets: $15. Livingston Avenue, New Brunswick. (732) 246-5560.FORUM THEATER COMPANY ''Nunsense,'' by Dan Goggin. Through next Sunday. Friday and Saturday at 8 p.m.; next Sunday at 2 p.m. Tickets: $30 and $32. 314 Main Street, Metuchen. (732) 548-0582.GEORGE STREET PLAYHOUSE ''Ancestral Voices,'' by A. R. Gurney. Through May 28.  Tuesdays through Saturdays at 8 p.m.; Saturdays at 2 p.m.; Sundays and 2 p.m. and 7 p.m. Tickets: $22 to $40. The Next Stage Festival.  Friday through June 11. Reno and Christina Anderson. Friday at 8 p.m. Carmeltia Tropicana and Trazana Beverley. Saturday at 8 p.m. Tickets: $10. 9 Livingston Avenue, New Brunswick. (732) 246-7717.HUNTERDON HILLS PLAYHOUSE ''Mary, Mary,'' Jean Kerr's comedy. Through June 30. Monday through Saturday luncheon performances at 11 a.m., $35.50 and $39.50; Saturdays at 6:30 p.m., $43 and $47; Sundays at 3:30 p.m., $41.50 and $45.50. Reservations required.  Exit 12 off Routes 78 and 22, Perryville. (800) 447-7313.KEAN COLLEGE New Jersey Ballet presents ''Carnival of the Animals.'' Today at 2 p.m. Tickets: $7. Wilkins Theater, 1000 Morris Avenue, Union. (908) 527-2337.KELSEY THEATER ''A Chorus Line.'' Today at 3 p.m. Tickets: $9 to $18. Mercer County Community College, 1200 Trenton Road, Trenton. (609) 584-9444.LUNA STAGE ''Jaques Brel Is Alive and Well and Living in Paris,'' 1960's revue. Through May 21. Thursdays, Fridays and Saturdays at 8 p.m.; Sundays at 2 p.m. Tickets: $12, Thursdays; $22, Friday through Sunday; $18 for students and older people; $27, opening night. 7 Oak Place, Montclair. (973) 744-3309.McCARTER THEATER ''Night Governess,'' world premiere musical by Polly Penn.  Through May 21. Tickets: $20 to $39. Center for the Performing Arts, 91 University Place, Princeton. (609) 258-2787.MAGNET THEATER COMPANY ''The Foreigner'' by Larry Shue. Through next Sunday. Thursday, Friday and Saturday at 8 p.m.; today and next Sunday at 2 p.m. Tickets: $12 for Thursday evening and Sunday matinees; $15 for Friday and Saturday; $10 for students and older people. Mill Hill Playhouse, Montgomery and Front Streets, Trenton. (609) 392-5589.MONTCLAIR STATE UNIVERSITY ''Shim Chung -- The Blindman's Daughter,'' performed by the Universal Ballet of Korea. Today at 7 p.m. Tickets: $25; $15 for students and older people. Memorial Auditorium, Valley Road and Normal Avenue, Upper Montclair. (973) 655-5112.MONMOUTH UNIVERSITY David Dorfman Dance. Saturday at 8 p.m. Tickets: $22. Pollak Auditorium, Cedar Avenue, West Long Branch. (732) 571-3483.NEW JERSEY PERFORMING ARTS CENTER Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater. Friday through next Sunday. Friday at 8 p.m.; Saturday at 2 p.m. and 8 p.m.; next Sunday at 3 p.m. Tickets: $15 to $64. Prudential Hall. 1 Center Street, Newark. (888) 466-5722.RADBURN PLAYERS Tennessee Williams's ''Cat on a Hot Tin Roof.'' Today at 2 p.m. Tickets: $10; $8 for students and older people. The Grange, 29-20 Fair Lawn Avenue, Fair Lawn. (973) 595-5629.RAMAPO COLLEGE American Repertory Ballet presents ''Romeo and Juliet.'' Today at 2 p.m. Tickets: $25; $12.50 for students. Sharp Theater, 505 Ramapo Valley Road, Mahwah. (201) 684-7844.SOUTH STREET PLAYERS ''Twelve Angry Men,'' dinner theater production. Friday and Saturday. Dinner begins at 7:30 p.m. Cost: $30 for dinner and show. Clarksburg Inn, Routes 524 and 571, Clarksburg. (732) 462-4329.STATE THEATER American Repertory Ballet presents ''Romeo and Juliet.'' Saturday at 2 p.m. and 8 p.m. Tickets: $14 to $32. 15 Livingston Avenue, New Brunswick. (732) 246-7469.Museums and GalleriesAMERICAN LABOR MUSEUM ''Vital Vestiges,'' a photodocumentary of the Paterson historic district's ruins. ''What is Industrial Hygiene?'' photo and illustration exhibit on loan from the American Industrial Hygiene Association in Virginia. Through June 25. Hours: Wednesdays through Saturdays, 1 to 4 p.m.; other times by appointment. Botto House National Landmark, 83 Norwood Street, Haledon. (973) 595-7953.CLEOPATRA STEPS OUT GALLERY ''Roadside New Jersey: A Celebration of the State's Glorious Eccentricities,'' Peter Genovese, author, chronicles New Jersey's roadside attractions in photographs and objects. Through May 20. Hours: Thursdays through Saturdays, 10 a.m. to 5 p.m.; Mondays through Wednesdays by appointment. 721 Cookman Avenue, Asbury Park. (732) 774-6306.CLIFTON ARTS CENTER ''Sculpture: Inside and Out.'' Through May 21. Hours: Thursday through Saturday, noon to 4 p.m.; Sunday, 1 to 4 p.m. Clifton and Van Houten Avenues, Clifton. (973) 472-5499.COOPER GALLERY ''Dancing Shapes in Rhythmic Space,'' paintings and sculpture by Jenne Currie. Through May 26. Hours: Tuesdays through Saturdays, noon to 7 p.m. 295 Grove Street, Jersey City. (201) 451-1074.FAIRLEIGH DICKINSON UNIVERSITY ''Inner and Outer Reality,'' mixed media exhibit, by Ruth Rintel. Tomorrow through June 2. Hours: Mondays through Fridays, 9 a.m. to 9 p.m.; Saturdays, 9 a.m. to 2 p.m. Edward Williams Gallery, 150 Kotte Place, Hackensack. (201) 692-2449.FIREHOUSE GALLERY ''Diversity: A Celebration of Individual Expression.'' Through May 31. Hours: Fridays and Saturdays, 11 a.m. to 5 p.m.; Wednesdays, 4 p.m. to 9 p.m.; Sundays, 10 a.m. to 2 p.m. 8 Walnut Street, Bordentown. (609) 298-3742.GROUNDS FOR SCULPTURE ''Spring Exhibition'' featuring Red Grooms: sculpture; Bill Barrett: sculpture and painting; and Andrzej Pitynski: partisans. Through July 2. Hours: Thursdays through Saturdays, 10 a.m. to 4 p.m.; Tuesday and Wednesday by appointment. 18 Fairgrounds Road, Hamilton Township. (609) 586-0616.JOHN HARMS CENTER FOR THE ARTS ''Arborealis,'' photography by Cali Gorevic. Through May 24. Hours: Mondays through Saturdays, 11 a.m. to 6 p.m. 30 North Van Brunt Street, Englewood. (201) 567-3600.HUNTERDON MUSEUM OF ART ''Robert Forman: 'Narratives in Thread' and 'Huichol Art in the Collection of Robert Forman.' '' Through June 18. Hours: Tuesdays through Sundays, 11 a.m. to 5 p.m. 7 Lower Center Street, Clinton. (908) 735-8415.J.C.C. ON THE PALISADES ''Mysticism and Mosaics,'' an exhibit of lithographs, seriagraphs, prints and original mosaics by Michoel Muchnik, artist. Through May 30. Reception: today, 1 p.m. to 3 p.m. Hours: Monday through Thursday, 9 a.m to 10 p.m.; Friday and Sunday, 9 a.m. to 5 p.m. 411 East Clinton Avenue, Tenafly. (201) 569-7900, extension 433.KERYGMA GALLERY ''Flowers: In the Still Life and Landscape,'' group show of gallery artists. Through May 27. Hours: Tuesdays through Saturdays, 10 a.m. to 5 p.m.; Sundays, 1 to 5 p.m. 38 Oak Street, Ridgewood. (201) 444-5510.LIBERTY HALL MUSEUM Grand Opening -- a historic house museum offering a unique view of New Jersey's history. Opening weekend celebration: today, 10 a.m. to 5 p.m. Hours:  Wednesdays through Sundays, 10 a.m. to 5 p.m. 1003 Morris Avenue (across from Kean University), Union. (908) 527-0400.LIBERTY SCIENCE CENTER ''Lakota Wolf Preserve,'' photographs by Dan Bacon. Through June 18. Hours: Tuesdays through Sundays, 9:30 to 5:30 p.m. Environment Level, Liberty State Park, 251 Phillip Street, Jersey City. (201) 451-0006, extension 295.MARSHA CHILD CONTEMPORARY ''Worlds on Paper,'' an exhibition of paintings, drawings, etchings, mezzotints, and more by artists from a dozen countries. Through May 27. Hours: Tuesdays through Saturdays, 10 a.m. to 5:30 p.m.; other times by appointment. 220 Alexander Street, Princeton. (609) 497-7330.MONTCLAIR ART MUSEUM ''Untamed Spirits: Animal Imagery in Native American Art.'' Through July 30. Hours: Tuesdays, Wednesdays, Fridays and Saturdays, 11 a.m. to 5 p.m.; Thursdays and Sundays, 1 to 5 p.m. Admission: $5; $4 for older people and students; free for members and children under 12. 3 South Mountain Avenue, Montclair. (973) 746-5555.MORRIS MUSEUM ''Fresh Perspectives.'' Through June 5.''The Collected Century, 1900 to 2000.'' Through June 11. ''Ice Age,'' featuring casts of mammals from the Pleistocene epoch. Through June 18. Hours: Sundays, 1 to 5 p.m.; Tuesdays through Saturdays, 10 a.m. to 5 p.m.; Thursdays to 8 p.m. Admission: $5; $3 for older people and children under age 3. 6 Normandy Heights Road, Morristown. (973) 538-0454.NEW JERSEY CENTER FOR VISUAL ARTS ''On the Horizon: Landscape at the Millennium.'' Through June 11. Hours: Mondays through Fridays, noon to 4 p.m.; Thursdays, 7 to 9 p.m.; Saturdays and Sundays, 2 to 4 p.m. Palmer Gallery, 68 Elm Street, Summit. (908) 273-9121.NEW JERSEY HISTORICAL SOCIETY ''History's Mysteries,'' interactive exhibition. Through June. ''Dining In, Dining Out,'' featuring photographs, video clips, rare silverware, period furniture and 18th-century cookbooks. Through summer, 2001. ''Pride of Newark: Baseball's Bears and Eagles,'' about the history of baseball in Newark. Through Summer 2001. Hours: Tuesdays through Saturdays, 10 a.m. to 5 p.m. 52 Park Place, Newark. (973) 596-8500.NEW JERSEY STATE MUSEUM Highlights from the Furniture and Painting Collections. Through next Sunday. ''Forgotten Gateway:  The Abandoned Building of Ellis Island,'' photographs by Larry Racioppo. Through June 30. ''The Modernists.'' Ends today. ''The Regionalists and Precisionists.'' Ends today.  ''Nikon's Small World, 1999-2000.'' Through May 23. Call for tickets: (800) 766-6048. Hours: Tuesdays through Saturdays, 9 a.m. to 4:45 p.m.; Sundays, noon to 5 p.m. Free. 205 West State Street, Trenton. (609) 292-6464.NEWARK MUSEUM ''From Tabletop to TV Tray: China and Glass in America, 1880-1980.'' Through June 18. ''Needless Necessity: Jewelry, Silver and Personal Meaning.'' Through December. Hours: Wednesdays through Sundays, noon to 5 p.m.; Thursdays (after hours) until 8:30 p.m. 49 Washington Street, Newark. (973) 596-6550.WILLIAM PATERSON UNIVERSITY Three Generations of Hobart Family Photographers.  Through June 4. Hours: Mondays through Fridays, 10 a.m. to 5 p.m. Hobart Manor, 300 Pompton Road, Wayne. (973) 720-2825.PRINCETON UNIVERSITY ART MUSEUM ''Curator's Choice: Recent Acquisitions.'' Through June 6. Photographs by Barbara Bosworth. Through June 18. ''A Window Into Collecting American Folk Art: The Edward Duff Balken Collection.'' Through June 18.  ''Flora and Fauna in Chinese Painting.'' Through July 30. Yayoi Kusama: Early Drawings From the Collection of Richard Castellane. Through July 30. Hours: Tuesdays through Saturdays, 10 a.m. to 5 p.m.; Sundays, 1 to 5 p.m. Princeton campus. (609) 258-3788.RUTGERS UNIVERSITY MABEL SMITH DOUGLASS LIBRARY ''Paintings, Collages and Assemblages,'' by Siri Berg; on display in the sixth and final exhibition of the 1999-2000 Mary H. Dana Women Artists Series. Through May 22. Mondays through Thursdays, 8 a.m. to 1 a.m.; Fridays, 8 a.m. to 9 p.m.; Saturdays, 10 a.m. to 8 p.m.; Sundays, noon to 1 a.m. George Street and Nichol Avenue, New Brunswick. (732) 932-9407.WHEATON VILLAGE ''American Glass: 1900-2000,'' featuring more than 100 industrial and decorative pieces. Through Oct. 22. ''2000 Flowers.'' Saturday through June 11. Hours: Wednesdays through Sundays, 10 a.m. to 5 p.m. Admission: $7; $6 for older people; $3.50 for students. Exit 26, Route 55, Millville. (800) 998-4552, extension 2756.WILLIAMS GALLERY ''Etchings From Angkor, Cambodia, and Nara, Japan: Recent Works by Jorg Schmeisser.'' Through Saturday. Hours: Tuesday through Saturday, 11 a.m. to 5 p.m.; other times by appointment. 8 Chambers Street, Princeton. (609) 921-1142.For ChildrenBERGEN COUNTY Y JEWISH COMMUNITY CENTER ''Magic Night!'' includes a performance by a professional magician, dinner and dessert. For children in kindergarten and first grade. Tickets: $18; $12 for members. 605 Pascack Road, Washington Township. (201) 666-6610, extension 210.FORUM THEATER COMPANY ''Narnia; the Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe,'' based on the ''Chronicles of Narnia'' by C. S. Lewis. Through June 10. Saturdays at 11 a.m. Tickets: $9. 314 Main Street, Metuchen. (732) 548-0582.HUNTERDON MUSEUM OF ART ''Spring Fever,'' workshops and classes for children and adults, including KinderArt, Cartooning Around, Collage Kids and more. Through June 8. Hours: Tuesdays through Sundays, 11 a.m. to 5 p.m. 7 Lower Center Street, Clinton. (908) 735-8415.KELSEY THEATER ''Little Red Riding Hood.'' Friday at 7 p.m.; Saturday and next Sunday at 2 p.m. and 4 p.m. Tickets: $7. Mercer County Community College, 1200 Trenton Road, Trenton. (609) 584-9444.NEWARK MUSEUM ''Where in the Universe Is Carmen Sandiego?'' at the Alice and Leonard Dreyfuss Planetarium. Through October. Saturdays and Sundays, 1 p.m. and 3 p.m. Tickets: $3; $2 for members; $1 for children and older people. 49 Washington Street, Newark. (973) 596-6355.NEW JERSEY STATE MUSEUM ''Laser Millennium 3-D,'' planetarium laser light show. Saturdays and Sundays at 1 and 3 p.m. Through June 25. Tickets: $6 includes 3-D glasses. 205 West State Street, Trenton. (609) 292-6464.PAPER MILL PLAYHOUSE ''Hansel and Gretel'' and ''Goldilocks and the Three Bears.'' Today at 10 a.m. ''Snow White,'' performed by the Gingerbread Players and Jack. Saturday and next Sunday at 10 a.m. Tickets: $8 and $9. Brookside Drive, Millburn. (973) 376-4343.RITZ THEATER ''The Fantasticks,'' musical. Through May 27. Fridays and Saturdays at 8 p.m.; Sundays at 2 p.m.; Wednesdays, May 10 and May 24, 7:30 p.m. Tickets: $12.50 to $16. 915 White Horse Pike, Oaklyn. (856) 858-5230.STOCKTON PERFORMING ARTS CENTER Green Thumb Theater for Young People presents ''The Beauty Machine.'' Tuesday at 10:30 a.m. and noon. Tickets: $6. Richard Stockton College, Jim Leeds Road, (609) 652-9000.STUDIO PLAYERS Magic Trunk Children's Theater presents ''Who's Afraid of the Big Bad Wolf.'' Saturday and next Sunday at 1:30 and 3:30 p.m. Through May 21. Tickets: $6. 14 Alvin Place, Montclair. (973) 744-9752.TRAILSIDE NATURE AND SCIENCE CENTER ''Pet Fair,'' featuring demonstrations by the Morris County 4-H Sled Dog Club and the Union County K-9 Division, vendors, contests and games. Today at 2 p.m. Admission: $1; free for children age 7 and younger. 452 New Providence Road, Mountainside. (908) 789-3670.WATCHUNG PUBLIC LIBRARY Puppet Designers of Moorestown presents ''Four Little Piglets and Enviro the Wolf.'' For children ages 4 and older. Free, registration required. Thursday at 4 p.m. 12 Stirling Road, Watchung. (908) 561-0117.Spoken WordBARNES & NOBLE George B. Jacobs, M.D., author of ''A Simple Twist of Fate.'' Wednesday at 7:30 p.m. Free. 160 Route 17 North, Paramus. (201) 261-6995.BOOKENDS BOOKSTORE Edward Rutherford, author of ''Sarum,'' ''Russka'' and ''London.'' Today at 1 p.m. Hamilton Jordan, chief of staff for President Carter and author of ''No Such Thing as a Bad Day.'' Wednesday at 7 p.m. Ilene Beckerman, author of ''Mother of the Bride: The Dream, the Reality, the Search for the Perfect Dress.'' Saturday at 1 p.m. Free. 232 East Ridgewood Avenue, Ridgewood. (201) 445-0726.J.C.C. ON THE PALISADES Stephen J. Dubner, author of ''Turbulent Souls: A Catholic Son's Return to His Jewish Family.'' Thursday at 7:30 p.m. Tickets: $18; $15 members and older people. 411 East Clinton Avenue, Tenafly. (201) 569-7900, extension 433.JEWISH HISTORICAL SOCIETY OF METROWEST ''1925-1950: Entering the Mainstream,'' a lecture on Jewish life in America by Jenna W. Joselit, Ph.D., historian and author. Tuesday at 7:30 p.m. Free. Alex Aidekman Campus, Bleiweiss Center, 910 Route 10, Whippany. (973) 564-6466.RAMAPO COLLEGE ''The Use of Jazz as Propaganda During the Third Reich,'' a multi-media lecture by Harold Lieberman, music professor and trumpeter. Tuesday at 7 p.m. Free. Berrie Center for the Performing Arts, 505 Ramapo Valley Road, Mahwah. (201) 684-7409.Etc.CRANFORD'S ANNUAL ARTS AND CRAFTS FESTIVAL Crafts, food and musical entertainment. Today, 11 a.m. to 5 p.m. Free admission and parking. Raindate May 28. Eastman Plaza, Cranford. (908) 996-3036.JOHN HARMS CENTER FOR THE ARTS ''Excentrics,'' a theatrical circus show by Cirque Eloize. Saturday at 7 p.m. Tickets: $28 and $20. 30 North Van Brunt Street, Englewood. (201) 567-3600.HOBOKEN SPRING ARTS AND MUSIC FESTIVAL Arts and crafts for display and sale, two music stages, children's activities and food vendors. Today, 11 a.m. to 6 p.m. Washington Street, from Newark to Seventh Streets. Free. (201) 420-2207.HOME IMPROVEMENT FAIR Exhibitors include contractors, craftworkers and specialty dealers offering services and goods for remodelling or decorating. Today, 10:30 a.m to 7 p.m. Tickets: $40. Community and Recreational Center, Ninth Street and Marin Boulevard, Jersey City. (201) 798-9066.MORRISTOWN NATIONAL HISTORIC PARK Two-hour, one-mile wildflower walk. Today at 2 p.m. Entrance fee: $4; free for children under age 16. Jockey Hollow Visitor Center, near exit 30B of Interstate 287. (908) 766-6841.SOMERSET COUNTY PARK COMMISSION ''Woodland Walks at Leonard J. Buck Garden,'' guided tour. Sundays at 2 p.m. Through May 21. Admission: $3; $2 for students and older people. Visitor Center, 11 Layton Road, Far Hills. (908) 234-2677.TRAILSIDE NATURE AND SCIENCE CENTER ''Astronomical Animals,'' planetarium show. Today, 2 and 3:30 p.m. Admission: $3; $2.55 for older people. 452 New Providence Road, Mountainside. (908) 789-3670.At the CasinosAll tickets are available through Ticketmaster, (800) 736-1420.BALLY'S PARK PLACE ''Legends in Concert,'' impersonations of Stevie Wonder, Little Richard, Elvis Presley, Linda Ronstadt and Barbara Streisand. Mondays through Thursdays at 3:30 and 7:30 p.m.; Saturdays at 8 and 10:30 p.m.; Sundays at 7:30 and 10 p.m. Tickets: $15 to $25. Park Cabaret, Boardwalk and Park Place. (800) 225-5977.CLARIDGE HOTEL ''Dream, Dream, Dream,'' featuring songs by the Everly Brothers. Through June 17. Monday through Thursday at 8 p.m.; Saturday at 7:30 p.m. and 10 p.m.; Sunday at 7 p.m. Tickets: $15, Sunday through Thursday; $19, Saturday. Palace Theater, Boardwalk and Park Place. (609) 340-3700.SANDS HOTEL AND CASINO Frank Sinatra Jr. Thursday at 8 p.m., Friday at 10 p.m., Saturday at 8 and 11 p.m., next Sunday at 3 and 7:30 p.m. Tickets: $15 to $35. Indiana Avenue and Brighton Park. (609) 441-4137.TROPICANA ''Polkapalooza'' starring Jimmy Stur. Today, noon to 8 p.m. Free. ''Latin Fever.'' Through June 17. Mondays, Tuesdays and Thursdays at 8 p.m.; Wednesdays at 3:30 and 7:30 p.m.; Fridays at 9 p.m.; Saturdays at 8 and 11:30 p.m.; Sundays at 7 p.m. Tickets: $9.90. Boardwalk and Brighton Avenue. (609) 340-4020.TRUMP MARINA Robbie Krieger. Saturday at 9 p.m. Tickets: $16.50. The Shell. Huron Avenue and Brigantine Boulevard. (800) 777-8477.TRUMP TAJ MAHAL Kenny Loggins. Today at 8 p.m. Tickets: $30 and $60. Ringo Starr and his All-Star Band. Friday at 10 p.m., Saturday at 9 p.m. Tickets: 50 and $75. 1000 Boardwalk, at Virginia Avenue. (609) 449-1000.ARTS & ENTERTAINMENT
In his recent tally of the woes afflicting Hartford (April 30), Colin McEnroe neglects to note the city's biggest problem: professional nay-sayers like himself who seem to take perverse pleasure in their Hartford-as-basket-case views.There's plenty of work to be done in Hartford, no doubt about it. But one could counter Mr. McEnroe's list with one equally convincing in its positive tone. Among the items on such a list might be Hartford's recent recapture of its glorious riverfront, the additions under way at the Bushnell Theater and the city's downtown library as well as the Learning Corridor project, which has already put a fresh face on the city's South End.In his recent tally of the woes afflicting Hartford (April 30), Colin McEnroe neglects to note the city's biggest problem: professional nay-sayers like himself who seem to take perverse pleasure in their Hartford-as-basket-case views.There's plenty of work to be done in Hartford, no doubt about it. But one could counter Mr. McEnroe's list with one equally convincing in its positive tone. Among the items on such a list might be Hartford's recent recapture of its glorious riverfront, the additions under way at the Bushnell Theater and the city's downtown library as well as the Learning Corridor project, which has already put a fresh face on the city's South End.Near the end of his piece, Mr. McEnroe makes much of the fact that when his radio station moved out of Hartford, he chose to remain downtown at his own expense. Therefore, he claims, he is no sneering suburbanite.But is a sneering urbanite any better?What's the point of staying in Hartford if one's not going to use one's  talent and influence to move the community forward?CLARE ROSSINI  Hartford
Remembering BroadwayMONDAY -- The Broadway Theater Institute will hold a benefit from 6 to 8 p.m. at Club New York, 252 West 43rd Street (Eighth Avenue). Awards will be given to several theater institutions, including the Shubert Organization, which will receive an award honoring its 100th anniversary. Presenters will include Kitty Carlisle Hart and James Lapine. Proceeds go to the institute's programs  that preserve the history of live theater on Broadway, and for the plan it is formulating for the creation of a museum and learning center in the Theater District. Tickets, $50, (212) 956-5481.Remembering BroadwayMONDAY -- The Broadway Theater Institute will hold a benefit from 6 to 8 p.m. at Club New York, 252 West 43rd Street (Eighth Avenue). Awards will be given to several theater institutions, including the Shubert Organization, which will receive an award honoring its 100th anniversary. Presenters will include Kitty Carlisle Hart and James Lapine. Proceeds go to the institute's programs  that preserve the history of live theater on Broadway, and for the plan it is formulating for the creation of a museum and learning center in the Theater District. Tickets, $50, (212) 956-5481.Honoring Senator MoynihanTHURSDAY -- Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan will be honored at a black-tie dinner at the Waldorf-Astoria to raise money for scholarships at the New School University. Senator Bob Kerrey of Nebraska, who is to become the university's new president when his Senate term concludes in January, will speak. Drinks at 6:30 will be followed by dinner at 7:30. Tickets, $500, from (212) 229-5662, ext. 250.Dining Surrounded by ArtTHURSDAY -- A preview of the annual International Fine Art Fair, at the Seventh Regiment Armory, Park Avenue at 67th Street, will raise money for the social service programs of the Lenox Hill Neighborhood House. Dinner will take place among the booths, and interior decorators will style tables to suggest the works of famous painters. The evening begins with a cocktail reception at 5:30 dinner follows at 8. Tickets, $1,000, or $250 for the reception alone, from (212) 744-5022, ext. 1282.So Children Breathe EasierTHURSDAY -- The Children's Allergy, Immunology and Respiratory Center will be supported by a spring dinner-dance at the New York Hilton. Dr. Max Gomez, medical correspondent on WNBC-TV, will be the master of ceremonies at the black-tie evening. The event will raise money for research, patient care and community education programs at the center, which is part of Weill Cornell Medical Center of New York Presbyterian Hospital. The evening begins with a cocktail reception at 6:30, with dinner and dancing to follow at 7:30. Dr. Arthur Klein will be honored for his work as the hospital's chief operating officer and executive vice president of the pediatrics department. Tickets, $300, from (212) 821-0560.Picture HonorsTHURSDAY -- Peter Jennings of ABC News will lead the 16th annual Infinity Awards given by the International Center for Photography. The event, at the Regent Wall Street Hotel, 55 Wall Street, begins with drinks at 6:30, followed by dinner and the awards. The honorees include Helmut Newton, James Nachtwey and Adam Fuss. The evening will benefit the museum's exhibition programs and its free photography education classes in the South Bronx, East Harlem and Hell's Kitchen. Tickets, $500, from (212) 860-1777, ext. 141.Sisters at the PlazaTHURSDAY -- The Catholic Big Sisters will hold its annual spring dinner and dance at the Plaza. The black-tie evening will begin at 6:30 p.m. with cocktails and a silent auction. The evening will benefit the agency's social services on the Lower East Side, including free family and student counseling, mentoring for students and adults, and classes in English as a second language. Tickets, $350, from (212) 838-2660, ext 16.The Iris BallFRIDAY -- The Iris Ball, an annual dinner-dance to raise money for the Manhattan League of Helen Keller Services for the Blind, will be held at the St. Regis. The black-tie evening begins at 7 with drinks, followed by dinner at 8 and dancing to the Tom Harrington Orchestra. Tickets, $300, from (212) 285-7029, ext. 212.Perpetuating MotionNEXT SUNDAY -- Mikhail Baryshnikov and Laurie Anderson will be among those performing at a benefit for the new works fund of the Trisha Brown Dance Company. The event will take place at the Joyce Theater, 175 Eighth Avenue (19th Street). A Champagne reception at 5 p.m. will be followed by the performance at 7. Afterward, dinner will be served at  the Matthew Marks Gallery, 523 West 24th Street. Transportation will be provided. Tickets are $1,000 or $75 and up for the performance alone, from (212) 582-0040.Pops at Carnegie HallMAY 15 -- A benefit concert and dinner-dance will support the free summer concert series and educational programs of the New York Pops. The black-tie evening begins at 7:30 at Carnegie Hall with a musical tribute to Schuyler G. Chapin, the New York City Cultural Affairs Commissioner. Dinner and dancing will follow at 10 at the Plaza. Tickets, $500, or $35 to $150 for the concert alone, from (212) 765-7677.Aid for Homeless WomenMAY 15 -- Women in Need, which provides shelter and support services for homeless women and their children, will benefit from a dinner at the Cathedral Church of St. John the Divine. Joseph Cullman, the chairman emeritus of Philip Morris Companies, and his wife, Joan Cullman, a vice chairwoman of the Lincoln Center Theater, will be honored for their support. The evening begins with drinks at 6:30, with dinner to follow at 7:30. Students from the National Dance Institute and the Heritage Gospel Ensemble will perform. Tickets, $500, from (212) 838-6033.Curtain CallsMAY 15 -- Lauren Bacall and Brian Dennehy will be among those honored at a benefit for the 11 regional theaters of the National Corporate Theater Fund, including the Long Wharf in New Haven and Trinity Repertory Company in Providence, R.I. The black-tie event, at the Waldorf-Astoria, will begin with drinks at 6:30, with dinner to follow at 7:30. Members of the cast of ''Forbidden Broadway Strikes Back'' will perform. Tickets, $1,000, from (212) 888-7003.Environmental HonorsMAY 15 -- Educational centers of the National Audubon Society, including those at the boathouse in Prospect Park and in Greenwich, Conn., will benefit from a dinner and dance at Pier 60, at Chelsea Piers. Marian S. Heiskell, Paul Tudor Jones II and Roy E. Disney will be honored for their environmental efforts. The black-tie evening begins with a cocktail reception at 6:30, with dinner and dancing to follow. Tickets, $600, from (212) 997-0100.Aid at a Crucial MomentMAY 15 -- Cast members of the Broadway musical ''Swing'' will perform at a benefit at the Waldorf-Astoria for the Ronald McDonald House of New York City. The house provides accommodation and support for the families of children who are in New York to undergo treatment for cancer and other serious diseases. Al Roker will be the master of ceremonies at the event, which begins with cocktails at 6:30. Dinner at 7:30 will be followed by the performance. Tickets, $600, (212) 245-6570.A Century of SummersMAY 16 -- The 100th anniversary of Yaddo, the summer colony for artists, in Saratoga Springs, N.Y., will be celebrated at a dinner at the University Club, 1 West 54th Street. The author Calvin Trillin will be the master of ceremonies, and Arthur Gelb, a former president of The New York Times Company Foundation, will be honored. The black-tie evening will begin at 7 with drinks and a silent auction, with dinner to follow at 8. Tickets are $500, from (518) 584-0746.Protecting WomenMAY 16 -- Lesley Stahl of ''60 Minutes'' will speak at a benefit for the free crisis-intervention and counseling programs at the Mount Sinai Sexual Assault and Violence Intervention Program. The dinner, at the Sky Club, 200 Park Avenue (45th Street), will honor Linda Fairstein, the chief of the Sex Crimes Prosecution Unit of the Manhattan District Attorney's Office. The evening begins with cocktails at 6, with dinner to follow at 7. Tickets, $175, from (212) 423-2143.Humanitarians in the HarborMAY 16 -- A dinner at the Ellis Island Immigration Museum with former President and Mrs. George Bush will raise money for AmeriCares, the humanitarian aid and disaster relief organization. The evening begins with a cocktail reception at 6:30, with dinner and a performance by the United Nations International School Concert Choir to follow at 7:30. Ferries to Ellis Island leave from Battery Park beginning at 6. Tickets, $1,000, from (203) 972-5510.
As a union protest at a lumberyard stretched into its seventh month, community groups, religious organizations and high school students have joined workers in criticizing a business they say has locked out employees and refused to pay fair wages. The focus of the protest is Rode & Horn Lumber, a company at 90 Waterbury Street that supplies high-end wood to carpenters and furniture makers.Twelve employees have been demonstrating outside the lumberyard since October, after months of dispute over a new contract. Timothy Lynch, president of Teamsters Local 1205, which represents the workers, said the company tried to break off relations with the union three years ago. Eventually the National Labor Relations Board ordered the lumberyard to negotiate with the union.As a union protest at a lumberyard stretched into its seventh month, community groups, religious organizations and high school students have joined workers in criticizing a business they say has locked out employees and refused to pay fair wages. The focus of the protest is Rode & Horn Lumber, a company at 90 Waterbury Street that supplies high-end wood to carpenters and furniture makers.Twelve employees have been demonstrating outside the lumberyard since October, after months of dispute over a new contract. Timothy Lynch, president of Teamsters Local 1205, which represents the workers, said the company tried to break off relations with the union three years ago. Eventually the National Labor Relations Board ordered the lumberyard to negotiate with the union.But, he added: ''It's been one and a half years, and they've failed to sign a contract. For seven months now they've locked the men out and replaced them with scab labor.''According to Mr. Lynch, employees had been earning an average of $11 an hour and the union wanted to increase wages to nearly $17, the average for city lumber workers. Joshua and Lazer Sternhell, the owners, had offered an increase of 10 cents an hour.In recent months, local religious organizations and community groups have written to the company in support of the workers, many of whom have been with the lumberyard for decades. In March, representatives of several organizations tried to meet with the Sternhells.''They wouldn't meet with us,'' said Stephen Jenkins, a coordinator for Make the Road by Walking, a Bushwick community group that was represented at the meeting. ''We met with a lower-level supervisor, and he said he would pass on our message to them. But we haven't heard from them. It's frustrating.''Students at the nearby Progress High School have discussed the situation in their social studies classes, and several joined in a worker protest on Monday. Many students whose parents work at similar union jobs identify with the workers. ''If they did that to them,'' said Anny Rodriguez, 16, ''they could do it to our parents.''Lazer Sternhell said he sympathized with the workers, but he called the union's demands unreasonable.''We've been accused of slave-driving and mistreating workers,'' he said. ''However, Local 1205 is requiring a 35 percent raise while nationally collective bargaining agreements are 3 percent.''In March, the National Labor Relations Board issued unfair-labor charges against the company. If there is no settlement, the case could go to trial.TARA BAHRAMPOURNEIGHBORHOOD REPORT: WILLIAMSBURG
Accusations of a ''secret plan'' that would bankrupt Social Security. Intimations of a laxity in the war on drugs. Allegations that gun lobbyists would be virtual residents of the Oval Office.Vice President Al Gore went on the offensive again and again last week, using a series of campaign appearances across the country not only to advance his own policy initiatives, but to sow suspicion about the goals of his presumed opponent in the general election, Gov. George W. Bush of Texas.Accusations of a ''secret plan'' that would bankrupt Social Security. Intimations of a laxity in the war on drugs. Allegations that gun lobbyists would be virtual residents of the Oval Office.Vice President Al Gore went on the offensive again and again last week, using a series of campaign appearances across the country not only to advance his own policy initiatives, but to sow suspicion about the goals of his presumed opponent in the general election, Gov. George W. Bush of Texas.''Maybe he would pick Charlton Heston as the next surgeon general,'' Mr. Gore said in Chicago, referring to the financial backing Republicans are getting from the National Rifle Association, whose president is Mr. Heston.Mr. Gore's hammering away was a leading indicator of a new, more aggressive phase of the campaign. The retreat of Elian Gonzalez with his father to a Maryland estate seems to have opened up space again on America's front page for campaign machinations, much of them testier. In California, a conservative group, Shape the Debate, has begun running anti-Gore commercials; last week, Handgun Control introduced a spot that said Mr. Bush had signed a law that allows concealed guns in churches and amusement parks.The ammunition for Mr. Gore's attack was provided on Wednesday, when it was disclosed that the nation's gun companies had broken off settlement talks with 31 municipalities across the nation over lawsuits relating to gun violence, in hopes Mr. Bush would win the presidency and usher in a more favorable environment. (In other signs of the changing environment, a panel of Republicans proposed altering the current primary system, to allow only smaller states to vote first.)Mr. Bush, meanwhile, professed to be unfazed by Mr. Gore's jabs, although he couldn't help expressing some disgust. ''Totally pathetic,'' Mr. Bush said to a reporter after being informed that Mr. Gore tells Hispanic audiences that he had hoped his second grandchild would be born on Cinco de Mayo.PETER MARKS
To the Editor:We applaud the support for expanding drug and alcohol treatment expressed by Al Gore and George W. Bush (news article, May 3).Drug courts, which divert nonviolent, first-time offenders to supervised treatment rather than jail, are effective, yet put additional strain on scarce resources. Welfare reforms likewise require sobriety but put little money into treatment and prevention. Increased support from Congress is essential; additionally, the Department of Health and Human Services should release millions of Medicaid dollars currently prohibited for inpatient treatment.To the Editor:We applaud the support for expanding drug and alcohol treatment expressed by Al Gore and George W. Bush (news article, May 3).Drug courts, which divert nonviolent, first-time offenders to supervised treatment rather than jail, are effective, yet put additional strain on scarce resources. Welfare reforms likewise require sobriety but put little money into treatment and prevention. Increased support from Congress is essential; additionally, the Department of Health and Human Services should release millions of Medicaid dollars currently prohibited for inpatient treatment.Substance abuse costs this country $277 billion per year in medical costs, crime and lost productivity, yet only half of those who seek treatment can get it on demand. The support for treatment expressed by the candidates bodes well for our nation's future.TOM MCDANIELS  Director of National Policy  Legal Action Center  Washington, May 4, 2000
HERE is the problem in theory: A good job on the night shift opens up. A mother with several children is not offered the job, which would be a promotion, because her supervisor assumes -- wrongly -- that her family responsibilities prevent her from working nights.Did the supervisor act properly?HERE is the problem in theory: A good job on the night shift opens up. A mother with several children is not offered the job, which would be a promotion, because her supervisor assumes -- wrongly -- that her family responsibilities prevent her from working nights.Did the supervisor act properly?Hardly anyone would say so. Certainly the mother is the only one who knows whether she is able to work nights.Should the supervisor's action be against the law?Absolutely, in President Clinton's view.Is the problem pervasive?No one knows for sure.It is the kind of problem the president loves to address -- the way he has promoted school uniforms to improve classroom discipline and V-chips to block violent programs on television.His solutions cost little. They endear him to his admirers. And his political foes often seem to have been outsmarted.So last week, with a stroke of his pen, Mr. Clinton ordered an end to discrimination against federal workers because they are parents.''Believe it or not, there are still some employers who are reluctant to hire or to promote employees who have children at home,'' he said.His order, he said, sent this message: ''No glass ceiling for parents. The job they are doing at home is more important anyway, and if they can do your job, you ought not to stop them.''The key phrase is ''if they can do your job.''No one would argue seriously, for example, that because an employee cannot work nights, the government should be required by law to create a day-side promotion.A more difficult question is what happens when two people are in competition for employment or a promotion -- a single person who can work long hours and a parent who cannot afford to. Is it discrimination if the long hours are rewarded? Or is it discrimination if they are not?The practical effect of the executive order on those kinds of common situations is far from clear. The White House could not offer a single case of discrimination in the past that the president's executive order would now prohibit.Neither could the federal workers' union, the American Federation of Government Employees.Russ Binion, the president of Local 12, to which Labor Department employees belong, said, ''I know people don't get assignments because they have kids, but I can't give you a specific one.''The staff member who developed the policy, Bruce Reed, the president's chief domestic policy adviser, conceded that he did not know whether this kind of bias was a problem in the government.''We hope that this is not a widespread practice,'' Mr. Reed said, ''but we'd like to be on the safe side.''The executive order was welcomed in some circles as a symbol.''It's a very good thing the president did, because it's a marker,'' said Judith L. Lichtman, president of the National Partnership for Women and Families, a liberal advocacy group. ''This is how you get the conversation to change about what is acceptable and unacceptable behavior.''But as so often happens here, the president's political opponents were infuriated. It would be hard to overestimate the rage Bill Clinton ignites in some quarters nowadays, even over an executive order that may have no effect whatsoever.The response from Representative J. C. Watts Jr. of Oklahoma, chairman of the House Republican Conference, was typical:''This is the latest meaningless proposal from an administration desperately searching for a legacy that will endure after the evening news ends. Having already claimed credit for solving every problem under the sun, the Clinton-Gore team has apparently taken to espousing solutions in search of new problems.''President Clinton first broached the issue in his State of the Union Message last year. As part of a long list of proposals involving children and families, he declared:''I want to ask Congress to prohibit companies from refusing to hire or promote workers simply because they have children. That is not right.''On the president's behalf, Senators Edward M. Kennedy of Massachusetts and Christopher J. Dodd of Connecticut, both Democrats, introduced legislation last year that would have prohibited discrimination against parents by all employers. The bill went nowhere.So, unable to win support for a national policy, the president issued the executive order, which applies only to federal workers.Its range is narrow.Parents would not be guaranteed any jobs. Someone who could not work long hours because of family obligations would not have to be offered a position that required overtime. A worker who was not always free to travel could not expect a position that often required last-minute trips. A supervisor would be free to discipline an employee who was often late because child-care fell through.It is harder to ascertain what the order would do than what it would not do. White House officials made clear that the order sets a goal and does not give anyone the right to sue the government.The measure would certainly not alleviate the stress many parents face balancing the responsibilities of work and family.It would not seem to help, for instance, a clerk at the Labor Department, a single mother who asked when she was interviewed last week that her name not be used, who said she was sure she had been denied a promotion recently because of her family obligations. When pressed, she acknowledged that she had fallen behind in her work because she had taken so much unpaid leave to deal with a daughter's illness.IT wouldn't interfere in any way,'' said Joe Lockhart, the president's press secretary, ''with an employer's ability to reject workers who aren't able to perform a job in question. It would simply ensure that workers aren't discriminated against on the basis of being a parent.''The problem may be that this kind of discrimination is simply too subtle to prove.
TEN years after recapturing the Continent, Dwight D. Eisenhower calculated that the lessons of D-Day could be usefully applied in persuading  Congress to lace the land with highways. His administration dreamed up the National System of Interstate and Defense Highways and argued that these roads were not only about economic development, they were about national security.''In case of atomic attack on our key cities,'' he wrote in 1955, ''the road net must permit quick evacuation of target areas, mobilization of defense forces and maintenance of every essential economic function.''TEN years after recapturing the Continent, Dwight D. Eisenhower calculated that the lessons of D-Day could be usefully applied in persuading  Congress to lace the land with highways. His administration dreamed up the National System of Interstate and Defense Highways and argued that these roads were not only about economic development, they were about national security.''In case of atomic attack on our key cities,'' he wrote in 1955, ''the road net must permit quick evacuation of target areas, mobilization of defense forces and maintenance of every essential economic function.''Half a century later, the highways he built can barely handle a 5 p.m. crush of commuters in their S.U.V.'s, much less a panicky evacuation of the capital. But if he were alive today, the old five-star might smile to hear the latest Clinton White House strategy. The president and his national security adviser, Samuel R. Berger, have taken up a mantra that granting permanent ''normal'' trading status to China isn't just about profit opportunities, it's also about national security. At the same time, the administration has labeled the AIDS crisis in Africa a threat to national security, and Vice President Al Gore has raised similar fears with his ''new security agenda,'' which includes global warming.Without question there is a case to be made that economic chaos, disease and climatic upheaval can all trigger political nastiness. So all of this new labeling raises a question: Just when does a big problem turn into a national security threat?On trade with China, the Clinton administration argument is that granting normal trade status would reassure the Chinese that America isn't trying to hem them in.''From a national security point of view, it would in my view be a very, very unwise and precarious move to say that the United States doesn't care whether they're part of the world community or not,'' President Clinton told an insurance group last week, a theme he repeated nightly as he tried to win over 40 or so legislators who were still undecided about the China bill.Only days before, the White House was  arguing that the spread of AIDS in Africa would lead to economic collapse, political instability and civil wars that might eventually require American intervention.''I'm not saying that we have a short list of national security threats and East Timor is now off and AIDS is on it,'' Mr. Berger said in an interview. But strife has many origins, he said: ''If it creates instability, chaos, conflict and war, that has national security implications.''Mr. Gore, meanwhile, used a foreign policy speech last weekend to argue for the need for ''forward engagement'' (presumably a Gore-ism for trying to think ahead). He ticked off -- in no particular order of priority -- pandemics, economic inequality, global warming and the digital divide as potential security problems that had to be nipped in the bud.In Mr. Gore's case, the political calculation is obvious: he is trying to portray his opponent, George W. Bush, as a man caught in what he termed a cold-war mindset that sees national security only in the most conventional terms.But it is still unclear whether the new Democratic relabeling of issues is just shrewd political marketing -- to Democrats who don't like trade deals, and to Republicans who don't care for foreign aid, particularly when it involves AIDS -- or a truly new agenda for an age of new global threats.It is hard to tell. As the Clinton presidency winds down, the definition of national security threats has gotten ever fuzzier. Even some senior members of the administration worry privately that the White House regularly overplays its hand and should reserve the national security argument for events tightly linked to the prospect of the United States becoming involved in conflict. ''There's a significant risk of crying wolf,'' one of the president's top security advisers concedes. ''This isn't Sputnik,'' he added, in another allusion to the Eisenhower years, when appeals for education funds could be based on fears that the Russians were well ahead in the race to build the first I.C.B.M.'s.Clearly there is a strong moral argument for helping the destitute ravaged by AIDS, in Africa or elsewhere. And no doubt the disease could lead to political instability. But so can poverty, and the 1.3 billion people who live on less than a dollar a day trigger meetings at the World Bank these days, not in the Situation Room.Advisers to Mr. Bush, eager to portray the current occupants of the White House as long on butter and short on guns, carry the argument one step further: by making the list of security threats too long, they argue, the Clinton administration risks taking its eye off more imminent threats. Or as Paul Wolfowitz, dean of the school of Advanced International Studies at Johns Hopkins University and one of those advisers, wrote recently, AIDS in Africa and the environment are serious problems, but calling them  national security threats carries ''the implication that conventional security is no longer something we need to worry much about.''But this is also an administration repeatedly stung by the criticism that its foreign policy has been a series of belated reactions, rather than the product of any global strategy. So Americans may be ready to welcome anything resembling preparation for new crises, as long as it differentiates between real security threats, potential threats and social work. And it is possible -- though hardly certain -- that after a decade of unchallenged power and prosperity, Americans are ready to think about their national security in broader terms.A decade ago, any serious official who argued that admitting Communist China into a Western trade regime might change China's political culture would have been laughed out of the National Security Council. Today, even some Republicans sound a lot like Bill Clinton when it comes to talking about the benefits of exposing China to a Western-designed legal system or fueling the spread of the Internet. ''China's emergence as a world power is a classic security issue,'' said Richard Armitage, who has served several Republican presidents, ''and if getting them into the world trading system makes them more restrained, a better actor, then I'm for it.''Mr. Clinton's most potent argument may be the one he hasn't made in public, chiefly to avoid offending two of America's closest allies. In the first half of the 20th century, Germany and Japan lashed out in large part because they felt the world was constraining not only their military might, but their ability to manufacture and export. Any global system that reduces trade barriers, the theory goes, also deflates some of those pressures.But non-economic forces also cause wars, and it is a mistake, Treasury Secretary Lawrence H. Summers acknowledges, to ''overemphasize the link between economic forces and future conflict.'' Perhaps that is why Mr. Clinton and Mr. Berger last week opened a new front in the China argument. Rather than argue the economic and political benefits of getting China into the tent, they made the case that keeping it out would court disaster -- that insulting China would strengthen the hand of the People's Liberation Army in its battle over China's direction with Prime Minister Zhu Rongji, the leader of China's move to a market economy. But if the Chinese economy opens too quickly -- forcing tens or hundreds of millions of workers in inefficient state-owned enterprises out of work -- Mr. Zhu could be blamed for that, too.Whatever one thinks of the logic, Mr. Clinton's national security case for letting China into the World Trade Organization seems to be winning some converts. ''The A.F.L.-C.I.O. has an answer to the economic arguments about this deal,'' one undecided congressman -- who asked not to be named -- said last week. ''But they don't have any answers on the security side.'' On the other hand, the effort to reclassify AIDS seems to have fallen flat. No one in either party is talking about reallocating the trillions saved by the Soviet Union's fall on international AIDS programs, or any other foreign aid.But China trade may be different. Eisenhower's highway system is now crumbling, and members of Congress want it fixed. A few who are on the fence about China have suggested that the place to fix the Interstate System is in their districts before Election Day. That might make them more amenable to the Clinton view of national security.Correction:  May 14, 2000, Sunday  Because of an editing error, an article last Sunday about national security issues truncated a comment from Treasury Secretary Lawrence H. Summers. As reported, Mr. Summers said it was a mistake to ''overemphasize the link between economic forces and future conflict'' because noneconomic forces also cause wars. But the main point of his comment was, ''When people are prosperous and hopeful, they don't look for men on horseback.''Correction: May 14, 2000, SundayBecause of an editing error, an article last Sunday about national security issues truncated a comment from Treasury Secretary Lawrence H. Summers. As reported, Mr. Summers said it was a mistake to ''overemphasize the link between economic forces and future conflict'' because noneconomic forces also cause wars. But the main point of his comment was, ''When people are prosperous and hopeful, they don't look for men on horseback.''
In a series of brisk exchanges last week, Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush laid out their disagreements over gun control, foreign policy, tax cuts, Social Security and Mr. Bush's record in Texas. Perhaps because he is struggling to stay even with Mr. Bush in the polls, Mr. Gore was on the attack almost every day, using highly personal language to derogate his opponent's policies. The subtext, however, was not about policy. It was about experience and temperament. Mr. Gore, with his customary lack of subtlety, was suggesting that Mr. Bush is an untested leader with half-baked ideas.  Stressing the value of experience is a time-honored strategy for the more seasoned candidate in presidential contests. But it comes with no guarantee of success. Otherwise we would never have had presidents named Carter, Reagan and Clinton.Jimmy Carter has been on both sides of the experience strategy. He won as a new face in 1976, but when he tried in 1980 to depict the Republican challenger, Ronald Reagan, as unready for the White House, the tactic backfired. Mr. Reagan was a deft campaigner and debater who skillfully parried Mr. Carter's attempt to make him appear a lightweight. That bit of history bears a cautionary message for Mr. Gore. Even though the vice president is the best debater in presidential politics today, Mr. Bush could gain significantly with a better-than-expected performance. For now, he is arguing that the vice president's extreme attacks distort his record and insult the voters.In a series of brisk exchanges last week, Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush laid out their disagreements over gun control, foreign policy, tax cuts, Social Security and Mr. Bush's record in Texas. Perhaps because he is struggling to stay even with Mr. Bush in the polls, Mr. Gore was on the attack almost every day, using highly personal language to derogate his opponent's policies. The subtext, however, was not about policy. It was about experience and temperament. Mr. Gore, with his customary lack of subtlety, was suggesting that Mr. Bush is an untested leader with half-baked ideas.  Stressing the value of experience is a time-honored strategy for the more seasoned candidate in presidential contests. But it comes with no guarantee of success. Otherwise we would never have had presidents named Carter, Reagan and Clinton.Jimmy Carter has been on both sides of the experience strategy. He won as a new face in 1976, but when he tried in 1980 to depict the Republican challenger, Ronald Reagan, as unready for the White House, the tactic backfired. Mr. Reagan was a deft campaigner and debater who skillfully parried Mr. Carter's attempt to make him appear a lightweight. That bit of history bears a cautionary message for Mr. Gore. Even though the vice president is the best debater in presidential politics today, Mr. Bush could gain significantly with a better-than-expected performance. For now, he is arguing that the vice president's extreme attacks distort his record and insult the voters.Down the road, however, he will have to engage Mr. Gore's points more directly. The vice president is right to raise questions about Mr. Bush's achievement in education, the environment, health care and budget issues. He may have exaggerated Mr. Bush's lack of budget experience, but his point that Texas has a weak-governor system is a valid one.On foreign policy, Mr. Gore is also raising some fair questions about Mr. Bush, though there is a fine line between the license granted politicians who speak in generalities and outright distortion. The vice president accuses the governor of having a cold-war ''mindset'' that treats China and Russia as ''enemies.'' Mr. Bush says he has gone out of his way to assert the contrary. But Mr. Bush would withdraw loans and credits to Russia over its crackdown in Chechnya and abrogate the Antiballistic Missile Treaty. These two steps would be dangerously confrontational.Even so, Mr. Gore goes too far in accusing Mr. Bush of being an isolationist. As his father's son, he would be heir to policies -- and advisers -- that are international in outlook. As for China's status as a trade partner, Mr. Bush's position is the same as that of the Clinton administration.The arena where Mr. Gore has used his toughest language, surprisingly, is the budget. He repeatedly labels as perilous both the governor's $1.3 trillion tax-cut plan and his proposal to carve private investment accounts out of the Social Security system. In fact, Mr. Gore's reliance on the word ''risky'' for almost every Bush proposal probably should inspire someone to send the vice president a thesaurus. His point, however, is right. The tax cut, which Mr. Gore says would actually cost more than $2 trillion if you included the extra interest expenses from not paying down the debt, is ill-advised. And Mr. Bush has not addressed warnings from such stellar Republicans as Alan Greenspan that a big tax cut now could hurt the economy.It is of course an exaggeration for Mr. Gore to say that Mr. Bush has a ''secret plan'' for Social Security. There is something to be said for Mr. Bush's not getting lost in details, as former Senator Bill Bradley did earlier this year on the health issue. But the governor needs to flesh out his ideas on Social Security privatization. He must also explain how he would pay for his tax cut and at the same time increase military and education spending without jeopardizing other vital programs.There is a risk that the public could be turned off by bitter exchanges over policy minutiae and budget numbers. But such debates take the measure of the candidates. For Mr. Gore they reveal a policy aficionado who also has a gladiatorial instinct for verbal combat. For Mr. Bush they reveal someone who prefers to be aloof from detail, but who may not be able to pull that off with the ease of a Ronald Reagan. As the debate over experience continues, the candidates will be eyeing the polls for a reading on what the voters make of Mr. Bush's desire to float above the fray or Mr. Gore's desire to plunge into it.
Nothing enraptures lawmakers in an election year like a prolonged discussion about the needs of school children, an issue that ranks sky high in importance for voters.This week, the Senate delved into the year's most important education bill, a piece of legislation that would provide nearly $15 billion in education money, most of it for impoverished students. Democrats fashioned a ''war room'' with a chalkboard, school desks and computers, where senators conducted on-line chats about education. Republicans countered with snazzy charts and a steady flow of news conferences inside and outside the Capitol.Nothing enraptures lawmakers in an election year like a prolonged discussion about the needs of school children, an issue that ranks sky high in importance for voters.This week, the Senate delved into the year's most important education bill, a piece of legislation that would provide nearly $15 billion in education money, most of it for impoverished students. Democrats fashioned a ''war room'' with a chalkboard, school desks and computers, where senators conducted on-line chats about education. Republicans countered with snazzy charts and a steady flow of news conferences inside and outside the Capitol.But behind all the razzle-dazzle lies one startling possibility: This could be the first time in 35 years that an education bill so bogs down over partisan differences that it is vetoed by a president, if it does not get yanked from the Senate floor altogether.''I've never seen things so contentious,'' said Christopher Cross, a former senior Republican aide in the House who is now president of the nonprofit Council for Basic Education. ''And I've never seen them take so long to enact a piece of education legislation. We are now well into the second year, and it looks as if they won't get anything enacted.''Instead of trying to write bipartisan legislation, Republicans and Democrats have seized the debate to showcase their opposing remedies for ailing schools. The fact that Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush of Texas have turned education into a signature issue has only served to infuse this year's Senate debate with partisan rancor.Fuming Democrats say they never bungled the education bill, a measure revising and extending federal school programs that comes up every six years, when they were in charge. They accuse Republicans of trying to jam through proposals that would devastate low-income schools. ''The Democrats never made this a partisan issue,'' said Senator Edward M. Kennedy of Massachusetts, who is the Senate dean on education issues. ''It's inexcusable.''Republicans reply that Democrats purposely want to thwart the bill so they can turn around and label Republicans anti-education on the campaign stump and hold their advantage with voters on the issue. They say Democrats are beholden to the teachers' unions and so entrenched in the status quo they do not want to try anything new.''We have functioned for 35 years under a system developed by Democrats in Congress,'' said Senator Judd Gregg, Republican of New Hampshire. ''And we've had 35 years of kids who haven't been able to read or write.''If the bill founders this year, the consequences would not be catastrophic, which is one reason the Senate does not feel compelled to compromise. The Department of Education, and the local schools, would still receive their $14 billion under the current regulations without a change in policy.But the wrangling over the bill illustrates just how far apart the two parties stand in addressing the frustrations of parents, and demonstrates how deeply politicized the question of education has become on Capitol Hill.''In a way, you have both playing to the extremes of their parties,'' said Amy Wilkins, the principle partner for the Education Trust, a nonpartisan, nonprofit organization that focuses on poor children. ''Are these guys going to grow up or are they going to continue to posture?''As it stands now, President Clinton is likely to veto the bill if Republicans stay wedded to several of their proposals. One would send billions of dollars directly to the states through block grants, giving governors leeway over how to spend the money.Democrats say the states need to be held responsible for how they spend their money. Republicans maintain that their bill would tie the money to improved academic performance.''There is virtually no accountability on the Republican side with the blank-check approach they use in their block grants,'' said Senator Tom Daschle of South Dakota, the Democratic leader.A second component would permit some disadvantaged students to switch public schools and take their federal dollars with them, a move Republicans said would prompt underachieving schools to shape up. Democrats argue that the measure would drain money away from the schools that need it most.What's needed, Democrats argue, is more money to spend on more teachers, to fix decrepit school buildings and to help poor children. This remedy, which originated with President Clinton, is widely supported by the teachers' unions,The legislation and the debate crystallizes the fundamental differences between the two parties.Despite deep philosophical divisions, each side has made concessions. Republicans, who vowed a few years ago to dismantle the Department of Education, have increased federal spending on education several years in a row. And Democrats are more willing to demand accountability for education programs.Frustrated with the lack of consensus, a small group of moderate Senate Democrats, led by Senator Joseph I. Lieberman of Connecticut, and Evan Bayh of Indiana, is pushing alternative legislation that poaches ideas from both parties. The two senators agree that local school districts need more money and more flexibility to spend the money they get, but they also need oversight.In the House, Representative Nancy L. Johnson, Republican of Connecticut, and Representative Charles B. Rangel, Democrat of New York, have banded together to pass a bipartisan bill on school construction.These efforts at compromise could well be thwarted by the forces of election year politics. ''People want to be concerned about having an issue,'' Mr. Lieberman said last month.Despite the endless debate on education policy in Washington and on the campaign trail, education experts and lobbyists say both parties end up distorting the influence the federal government has on a child's education. The $15 billion being talked about is only about 7 percent of the budget for all education spending, and the bulk is directed at disadvantaged children.''The public is going to be led to believe that problems will be solved at the national level, and they won't be,'' said Mr. Cross of the Council for Basic Education. ''They are solved school by school.''
Mark Katz, presidential comedy writer, was pacing in the wings of the Washington Hilton like a nervous father-to-be while President Clinton delivered his lines at the White House correspondents' dinner last Saturday night.It was the high point of Washington's silly season, a kind of political sweeps, and Bill Clinton was lampooning himself as the quintessential Lonely Guy in the twilight of his presidency. His performance at the dinner won accolades as his funniest ever. Mr. Clinton showed home movies of himself running after his wife with a lunch bag, watching his laundry dry and bicycling through the Old Executive Office Building; the video has been replaying in the capital's offices all week.Mark Katz, presidential comedy writer, was pacing in the wings of the Washington Hilton like a nervous father-to-be while President Clinton delivered his lines at the White House correspondents' dinner last Saturday night.It was the high point of Washington's silly season, a kind of political sweeps, and Bill Clinton was lampooning himself as the quintessential Lonely Guy in the twilight of his presidency. His performance at the dinner won accolades as his funniest ever. Mr. Clinton showed home movies of himself running after his wife with a lunch bag, watching his laundry dry and bicycling through the Old Executive Office Building; the video has been replaying in the capital's offices all week.Being funny at the annual dinners of the Alfalfa Club, the Gridiron Club, and the associations of White House and broadcast correspondents, has become serious business in Washington, and Mr. Katz is a regular writer on the circuit. ''A good joke will last a week,'' said Mr. Katz, who also helped write Vice President Al Gore's speech at this year's Gridiron dinner. ''And a bad joke will appear in their obituary.''The rules are strict. No sexually explicit humor. The radio talk show host Don Imus shocked Washington with his raunchy jokes about the president at the radio-television correspondents' dinner in 1996. Stay away from ethnic jokes. Former Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato learned that lesson the hard way when he tastelessly imitated an Asian accent in a radio talk show about Judge Lance A. Ito of California. Nothing too mean. The Gridiron Club's motto applies broadly to most Washington humor: singe but do not burn.Because the dinner speakers are mostly powerful politicians with large egos, leading Washington humorists agree that the key to success is self-deprecation. ''Self-deprecation allows you to get away with more,'' says Landon Parvin, who often writes jokes for prominent Republicans, including former Secretary of State James A. Baker.''Take aim at yourself and then pick your spots after that,'' Mr. Katz agrees. ''You must earn the right to make fun of others by making fun of yourself.''At the White House correspondents' dinner, Mr. Clinton made sure to singe himself first and brought down the house when he said: ''A year from now, I'll have to watch someone else give this speech. And I will feel an onset of that rare affliction, unique to former presidents. AGDD: Attention-Getting Deficit Disorder.''Self-deprecation was also the centerpiece of Vice President Gore's successful monologues at the Gridiron dinner, in 1994, 1997 and last March. At the 1994 dinner, Mr. Gore made fun of his reputation for stiffness by being wheeled into the dais on a handcart. This year, he told the assembled journalists that ''there are some things I won't do to become president. I won't hold a press conference.'' He also drew roars by asking plaintively: ''This isn't a fund-raiser, is it?''But he did not miss a chance to lampoon his presumed Republican rival for the presidency, Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, who he said ''thinks fettuccine Alfredo is the Italian prime minister.''Writing Washington humor can be tricky, not only because the jokes must be topical, but also because, ''You never know exactly what might go over the line,'' says Mr. Parvin. The 51-year-old scribe, who dreams up jokes at his home in Fredericksburg, Va., has mostly written for Republicans, but also helped write lines for Robert S. Strauss, the prominent lawyer and former Democratic National Committee national chairman, at this year's Gridiron dinner. Much of his time is spent writing serious speeches for politicians and corporate executives.''I write for people I like,'' he says.Mr. Parvin helped President Ronald Reagan use humor as a shield against his age, his glamorous background and even his relaxed work habits. But his big break came at the Gridiron dinner in 1982. He wrote the lyrics for a song, ''Secondhand Clothes,'' sung by Nancy Reagan, which parodied her taste for designer clothes.Mr. Katz, 36, formed the Soundbite Institute, a humor-writing consulting business, seven years ago in his apartment on the Upper West Side of Manhattan, after losing his job at an advertising agency. He is the institute's ''resident scholar.''In 1993, Mr. Katz wrote a speech for Madeleine K. Albright, who was then the United States ambassador  to the United Nations, that sparked laughter from President Clinton. He has since written for Mr. Clinton, Mr. Gore and Hillary Rodham Clinton.Mr. Katz says he likes to test ''the line'' in his humor writing. ''I try to figure out where the line is, walk directly up to it and say hi,'' he said. ''The challenge is writing right on the line.''One problem, both Mr. Katz and Mr. Parvin say, is that being funny has become a test for politicians. ''These are big pressure events,'' Mr. Parvin says.Humor has become another proving ground, especially for presidential candidates. Besides handling stand-up at the annual Washington dinners of media barons, politicians and lobbyists, politicians are expected to appear on the late-night Leno and Letterman shows, and on ''Saturday Night Live.''Mr. Gore has improved his timing and delivery in recent years, but can still be a bit rigid. Mr. Bush has yet to make a major Washington appearance as a humorist (he did a short speech at the Alfalfa Club in 1998) but his remarks did draw a few laughs at a recent Republican fund-raising dinner. His appearance on the Letterman show in March, however, drew chilly reviews.Presidents rarely bomb. ''A president gets laughs easier,'' Mr. Parvin says.In his last year in office, Mr. Clinton seems to have mastered humor and is having a great time using jokes to get in some last digs. At the radio and television correspondents' dinner, he won over the crowd with a gibe at ABC News's handling of Leonardo DiCaprio's interview with the president for the network's Earth Day special. ''Don't you news people ever learn?'' the president asked. ''It isn't the mistake that kills you, it's the cover-up.'' (Credit for this line apparently belongs to the White House deputy press secretary, Richard L. Siewert, not Mr. Katz.)The White House spokesman, Joe Lockhart, says it is Mr. Clinton, not his writers, who has become funnier. ''The president's delivery and ability to understand the timing of a joke is 95 percent of this,'' he said.
President Clinton has become a crucial behind-the-scenes player in the 2000 campaign, serving as a tactical adviser for House, Senate and gubernatorial candidates around the country.Although the spotlight has shifted to Vice President Al Gore and Hillary Rodham Clinton, prominent Democrats portray Mr. Clinton's role as that of an enormously valuable Strategist in Chief. They describe him as a sponge for absorbing political statistics -- a skill that is all the more enhanced because he has run twice in all 435 Congressional districts. And he willingly brings his well-honed political instincts to bear while exerting the power of the presidency to elect Democrats.President Clinton has become a crucial behind-the-scenes player in the 2000 campaign, serving as a tactical adviser for House, Senate and gubernatorial candidates around the country.Although the spotlight has shifted to Vice President Al Gore and Hillary Rodham Clinton, prominent Democrats portray Mr. Clinton's role as that of an enormously valuable Strategist in Chief. They describe him as a sponge for absorbing political statistics -- a skill that is all the more enhanced because he has run twice in all 435 Congressional districts. And he willingly brings his well-honed political instincts to bear while exerting the power of the presidency to elect Democrats.Mr. Clinton has been seeking election or re-election since 1974, when he was defeated in a race for Congress. And the president's closest advisers say that although he is no longer running himself, his passion for electoral politics has never receded. They also cite another, more personal, reason for Mr. Clinton's deep involvement: he wants to burnish his own legacy with the election of Mr. Gore to succeed him, the installation of Mrs. Clinton as senator from New York and the return of the House to Democratic control.''The guy can't live without a campaign in his life,'' said Senator John B. Breaux, Democrat of Louisiana. ''Life is a campaign for him. He needs a campaign to keep him going. This guy is not going to go into an igloo and freeze away. He can't help but advise.''Politicians and historians say they have never known of a president so deeply immersed in politics -- or a White House that, even during a lame-duck period, was so focused on polls and electoral considerations.The president is particularly engrossed in the first lady's race, and to a lesser degree in Mr. Gore's. But his involvement in campaigns from coast to coast is extraordinary.Mr. Clinton is much more than a fund-raiser in these campaigns, even as he has collected millions of dollars for House and Senate candidates. He offers candidates pointers on television and radio advertising scripts. He played a significant role in urging some prospects to run in the first place, and he often schedules trips and policy announcements with an eye to helping specific contenders.This portrait of Mr. Clinton has been gleaned from interviews with more than two dozen candidates and strategists, as well as lawmakers on Capitol Hill and officials at the White House and at the Democratic National Committee. Joe Lockhart, Mr. Clinton's press secretary, turned down a request to interview the president; some of Mr. Clinton's advisers said they were worried that it would seem unpresidential for him to discuss his activities openly.''He's the ultimate junkie,'' said Senator Robert G. Torricelli of New Jersey, chairman of the Democratic Senatorial Campaign Committee. ''He has the best walking knowledge of anybody in American politics.''Referring to Representative Ron Klink's drive to oust Senator Rick Santorum of Pennsylvania, Mr. Torricelli said: ''Last night he called me about the Klink race. He said he was convinced Klink could beat Santorum. He said, 'I want to do something in Philadelphia to bring our base in for Klink. I know he can carry western Pennsylvania, but he may have trouble consolidating the base in the east.' ''The president's network of contacts is vast because he has stumped in more than half the Congressional districts, his advisers say.Mr. Klink said that he telephoned the White House after he won his primary in April and Mr. Clinton ''took my call immediately.''''It's not just lip service,'' Mr. Klink said. ''He's really focused on this race. He can open doors with other individuals by telling them that this race is very meaningful to him.''Sometimes Mr. Clinton calls candidates on the telephone. More often, he grabs them to talk politics during his travels or at the White House.Craig Smith, a former Clinton political director, said he was at the White House recently to watch an Arkansas Razorbacks basketball game. At halftime, Mr. Smith said, the president cornered a group of his guests and held forth about the Democrats' presidential prospects in several states.He suggested that Mr. Gore not write off North Carolina in November, even though Mr. Clinton lost the state twice. If the Gore campaign takes that advice, it may cause the Bush campaign to rethink its own electoral tactics.''He came over and said, 'How do you think the math is working?' '' Mr. Smith said. ''He said, 'I think North Carolina looks good.' '' But Mr. Smith said he cautioned Mr. Clinton that the Democrats should think twice about pumping resources into the state.''I told him that state broke my heart -- twice,'' Mr. Smith said. ''But he said, 'I think we've got a shot.' ''Others who have talked politics with Mr. Clinton said he was preoccupied with the need for Democrats to win the loyalty of Hispanic voters. They said he had even spoken in detail about the importance of married Protestants. And, they said, he was particularly intrigued by contests in Michigan, New Jersey and Florida, where Mr. Gore has been pressing his campaign amid the tumult over the administration's handling of the Elian Gonzalez case.''Clinton is obsessed with Florida,'' the case of the Cuban boy ''and how it impacts,'' Mr. Torricelli said.Mr. Clinton still convenes political meetings twice a month or so in the ornate Yellow Oval Room in the White House family quarters. The sessions are not as pressing as they were when they were held weekly before the 1996 campaign, and the group of participants, which often numbers close to two dozen, is usually larger than the more exclusive club of the past. Mr. Gore does not attend anymore.Nevertheless, Mr. Clinton assembles his top aides, some cabinet secretaries and others to hash over how Democrats are performing and to look for ways to use his presidency to help candidates.At the start of the sessions, Mark Penn, a presidential pollster, reviews the latest surveys on an overhead projector. The discussion that follows is freewheeling, with Mr. Clinton -- who often chews on an unlighted cigar -- sounding at times like a political operative.''He is a full-time campaign manager at these meetings,'' one participant said. ''The entire meetings are discussions of how this would be good for Al or for the first lady and how he can help the legacy. Clinton is constantly saying, 'This would help Al.' ''Participants at the group's most recent meeting, in April, recalled that Mr. Clinton said he wanted to accept invitations to speak at college graduations in areas with high concentrations of minorities, like Shiprock, N.M., where he thought his appearance would help spur interest in Mr. Gore's campaign.A favorite pastime of the group is mocking Republicans in Congress, particularly when they do something that hurts them in the polls.James Carville, an architect of Mr. Clinton's victory in 1992, said of the president: ''If he calls me it would be to chat about Gore and Hillary. But I've had him tell me ideas for brochures in Senate races. He's a rare combination of somebody who's got the brains and the gut.''Joe Andrew, the national chairman of the Democratic National Committee, said he was dazzled by the president's knowledge of one Congressional district in Indiana, Mr. Andrew's home state. ''He said the Eighth Congressional District is one that goes back and forth -- the bloody Eighth,'' Mr. Andrew said. ''He knew that the southern part of the district was more conservative than the northern part. But he knew that in the southern part there had been tremendous growth because of a Toyota plant that opened there. And he knew of the Whirlpool plant in the northern part that had closed.''Michael J. Lapolla, the manager of Union County, N.J., who is seeking a House seat, said he ran into the president at a White House Christmas party last year. ''As soon as he found out what I was running for, he said he liked our chances and he knew just about everything about the district,'' Mr. Lapolla said.Mike Honda, a state assemblyman from San Jose, Calif., said Mr. Clinton helped persuade him to run for an open Congressional seat this year.Mr. Clinton has taken a particular interest in the campaign of Representative Rush D. Holt of New Jersey, a freshman in a tight race. ''His knowledge of New Jersey politics, and about my race in particular, is astounding,'' Mr. Holt said.Bill Nelson, the state insurance commissioner in Florida, who is running for the Senate, said Mr. Clinton went out of his way to praise him at a dinner of Floridians in Washington last November -- a move that he said helped considerably in persuading Democrats to take a serious look at his prospects. ''The President stands up in front of all these distinguished Floridians and proceeded to say very kind things about me,'' he said.Mr. Clinton is particularly involved in Mrs. Clinton's Senate campaign. One participant at a meeting with Mrs. Clinton's advisers said it was the president's idea that he not utter a word at his wife's official announcement of her candidacy in February.''When the issue came up of whether he would speak at Hillary's announcement, he weighed in and said, 'No,' '' the participant said. ''He said, 'I don't think that's right. This is her day.' There were plenty of people arguing the other way because it seemed unnatural for him not to speak. But it was a good judgment.''Despite Mr. Clinton's interest in his wife's race, Mr. Torricelli said the president does not fully grasp the unusual assortment of parties on the ballot in New York. ''He knows New York politically less than a lot of the other states,'' Mr. Torricelli said. ''He doesn't quite understand the mix of all those lines.'' Referring to Senator Charles E. Schumer of New York, he said, ''He calls Schumer and gets his opinion and calls me and plays off where we might differ.''While in past years some candidates have urged Mr. Clinton to stay clear of their districts, most of those interviewed said they were grateful for the president's wisdom and did not view him as an unwelcome meddler. ''He's not a Mr. Buttinski,'' Mr. Carville said.Yet some candidates were not so willing to bow before Mr. Clinton's expertise, perhaps out of fear that they might appear too close to the president. ''I've been in elective office over 20 years in Michigan,'' said Representative Debbie Stabenow, who is running for Senate and campaigned with the president this week. ''I know my state very well.''Asked how often he takes advice from Mr. Clinton, Tony Coelho, Mr. Gore's campaign chairman, said: ''I'm not going to go there.''
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani yesterday returned to what has been a solid source of support throughout his political career -- the Liberal Party, and its leader, Raymond B. Harding -- and asked for the party's backing as he sets his sights on the United States Senate. But Hillary Rodham Clinton also appeared before the same group, arguing that her views were more in touch with the Liberal ideology than were those of the Republican mayor.Mr. Giuliani and Mrs. Clinton each spent an hour in private at a Manhattan hotel with the policy committee of the Liberal Party, the first step in the party's move toward choosing its nominee by June 6. This usually barely noticed rite for candidates in New York drew a bustle of attention yesterday, evidenced by a lineup of cameras and security officers, reflecting the state and national political implications that have become attached to the decision by Mr. Harding's party.Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani yesterday returned to what has been a solid source of support throughout his political career -- the Liberal Party, and its leader, Raymond B. Harding -- and asked for the party's backing as he sets his sights on the United States Senate. But Hillary Rodham Clinton also appeared before the same group, arguing that her views were more in touch with the Liberal ideology than were those of the Republican mayor.Mr. Giuliani and Mrs. Clinton each spent an hour in private at a Manhattan hotel with the policy committee of the Liberal Party, the first step in the party's move toward choosing its nominee by June 6. This usually barely noticed rite for candidates in New York drew a bustle of attention yesterday, evidenced by a lineup of cameras and security officers, reflecting the state and national political implications that have become attached to the decision by Mr. Harding's party.''This is not my first time being interviewed by the Liberal Party,'' Mr. Giuliani said as soon as he left the meeting, grinning as he noted his longstanding ties with one of the smaller parties that his advisers believe could provide the winning margin in this election. When a reporter asked if he considered Mr. Harding a close adviser, Mr. Giuliani responded: ''I consider Ray Harding to be more than a close adviser. I consider him a close personal friend.''Mrs. Clinton pointed to the same friendship in remarks that seemed to lower expectations on her chances of winning the support of a party that almost invariably backs the Democratic candidate in statewide elections. ''I'm well aware of the mayor's relationship with Mr. Harding and the party,'' she said. ''But I came today to ask for their consideration, based on the issues that I'm talking about in this campaign and what I would do in the Senate.''As Mrs. Clinton knows, the only time a Democrat running for statewide office won without the cross-endorsement of the Liberal Party occurred in a Court of Appeals race in the 1970's, when judges to the state's highest court were still elected. Mr. Giuliani's aides noted this fact in a handout they distributed to reporters just before Mrs. Clinton left the committee meeting to talk with reporters.The Liberal Party has helped Mr. Giuliani's electoral success as mayor, not so much because of the relatively few votes he drew on the Liberal line, but because the party's support has allowed him to blur his ideological designation, making it more comfortable for some Democrats to vote for him.Mr. Harding was able to steer the endorsement to Mr. Giuliani with relatively little difficulty during his three races for mayor. But this high-visibility Senate race has presented the party with a particularly complicated choice. And it has put Mr. Harding in the position of choosing between the potential future of the 55-year-old party and his loyalty to a man who is a close friend and a source of jobs for his family and party.In an unusual display of public dissension, some Liberal Party members have said in recent days that they would oppose backing Mr. Giuliani, saying it would be a betrayal of the party's philosophy to send another Republican to the Senate.  And if Mr. Harding backs Mr. Giuliani, he risks losing a presidential candidate: Mrs. Clinton's aides have been pushing Vice President Al Gore to decline the Liberal Party line if the party backs Mr. Giuliani.Mr. Gore's aides said yesterday that he might accede to Mrs. Clinton's request. They said he would put off the decision as long as possible, giving him time to assess whether he needs the Liberal Party to win in New York (right now, his aides think he does not), as well as to see whether Mr. Giuliani stays in the race.Peter Ragone, a spokesman for Mr. Gore's campaign, said that the vice president was now beginning a closer look at the thicket of independent parties in New York, and that he would ''consider the endorsement'' of any party that shared his views. However, Mr. Ragone added, ''the vice president is a strong supporter of Hillary Clinton, and our campaign will do everything we can to elect her the next senator from New York.''Several of Mr. Harding's friends have tried to convince him that the Liberal Party's standing might be permanently damaged if it supports Mr. Giuliani and he defeats Mrs. Clinton this fall. And the advantage that Mr. Harding now enjoys by having Mr. Giuliani in City Hall ends in a year even if the mayor loses, because he will not be allowed to run for a third consecutive term.Mr. Harding has told friends that he will delay a decision as long as possible, in no small part to see whether Mr. Giuliani stays in the race. The mayor learned recently that he has prostate cancer and has said his medical condition would determine whether he stayed in the race.The Liberal Party endorsement has been important to Mr. Giuliani's political success to date, but he may be taking some risks in aggressively seeking its support in this race. For one thing, taking the Liberal Party line means giving up the Conservative Party line, said the Conservative Party chairman, Michael Long, who said it was ideologically dishonest for one candidate to run on both lines. The Conservative Party historically has been as critical to statewide Republican candidates as the Liberal has been to Democrats.''What he did today -- with Hillary, no less -- they both went and knelt at the altar of Ray Harding, who in fact gave us Bella Abzug, John Lindsay and Mario Cuomo,'' Mr. Long said. ''That sends a clear signal to the world that he wants to run with Al Gore, he wants to keep the Liberal tradition, and I don't know who the real Giuliani is.''In addition, running as the Liberal candidate is likely to complicate Mr. Giuliani's efforts to portray Mrs. Clinton as a liberal. That has been the thrust of his fund-raising appeals, and statewide Republican candidates have, for a decade, routinely attacked their Democratic opponents as liberal.When Mr. Giuliani was asked yesterday whether he considered Mrs. Clinton a liberal, he demurred. ''I think it would be overly simplistic to put labels on people,'' he said. ''I think you can say somebody is a liberal on something and moderate on something else and conservative on something else.''Turning the question to himself, Mr. Giuliani said: ''I think about me, they would say, he's conservative on economic matters, he's conservative on law and order. But he's moderate, and possibly even liberal, on social issues. It would depend on the part of the country you're in. In New York City, I'm often seen as very conservative. I travel south and west, I'm seen as very liberal. I like that, actually.''Mr. Harding greeted Mrs. Clinton politely when she arrived at the meeting at the Intercontinental Hotel, but, one participant said, asked no questions, sitting quietly in the back of a room that was thick with cigarette smoke.Mr. Giuliani and Mrs. Clinton share positions in their support of abortion rights, gay rights and gun control, as Mr. Harding noted after the meeting. But Mrs. Clinton pointed out some differences between them on issues of concern to Liberals, including her opposition to Mr. Giuliani's school voucher program,  and her criticism of the large tax cuts being advocated by Republicans in Washington.Asked her view of what the Liberal Party stood for, she responded: ''Based on what I know of it and what I've read about it, it stands for a sort of positive, progressive tradition in New York politics, and the kind of issues we've talked about. Very strong support for public education.  Strong support for child care and working families. Strong support for a minimum wage increase.''
Speculation has been especially intense since Gov. George W. Bush of Texas raised the possibility that he might choose Gov. Tom Ridge of Pennsylvania as a running mate. Not only does Mr. Ridge hail from an important battleground state with 23 electoral votes, but he also happens to be a close friend.Still, whenever Governor Ridge's name comes up, the point is almost always made that unlike Governor Bush, Governor Ridge favors abortion rights, hardly something that will endear him to the powerful Republican right. No matter, Governor Bush has said time and again, his friend merits consideration as a top prospect.Speculation has been especially intense since Gov. George W. Bush of Texas raised the possibility that he might choose Gov. Tom Ridge of Pennsylvania as a running mate. Not only does Mr. Ridge hail from an important battleground state with 23 electoral votes, but he also happens to be a close friend.Still, whenever Governor Ridge's name comes up, the point is almost always made that unlike Governor Bush, Governor Ridge favors abortion rights, hardly something that will endear him to the powerful Republican right. No matter, Governor Bush has said time and again, his friend merits consideration as a top prospect.Governor Ridge's critics think otherwise, and they seem bent on driving their point home.At a time when Mr. Ridge surely would prefer to be viewed as a governor who has cut taxes, improved schools, reformed welfare and cleaned up the environment, the Pro-Life Caucus in the Pennsylvania legislature is pushing hard to strip $4.3 million for family planning out of the state budget, arguing that the money is ''contributing to the abortion process.'' Mr. Ridge wants to keep the money in and, if the past is prologue, he will fight.When the issue came up in 1995, he managed to outmaneuver the caucus, even though a majority of the legislature is anti-abortion. And in 1996, he worked a compromise, retaining state money for use for family planning in general but agreeing that none would be used for abortions or abortion counseling.The head of the Pro-Life Caucus, State Representative Jerry Birmelin, a Republican from Pike County in the northeast corner of the state, says that while the governor might prefer that the funds issue not be on the legislative agenda at this point in the presidential campaign, the timing had nothing to do with him. ''Not my goal,'' Mr. Birmelin said the other day. ''It's not centered on him or anything he's doing.''
Theirs was a belated arrival, but the Philadelphia Phillies finally made an appearance in the 2000 season last week.Until they peeked out from their realm of repose, sort of like the groundhog on Feb. 2 in another Pennsylvania town, the Phillies seemed as if they might just take a pass on this season. Until they erupted for 14 runs and a second successive victory against Cincinnati, the Phillies had shown no evidence of life. Their vital signs were as comatose as their third-base coach's signs were unproductive.Theirs was a belated arrival, but the Philadelphia Phillies finally made an appearance in the 2000 season last week.Until they peeked out from their realm of repose, sort of like the groundhog on Feb. 2 in another Pennsylvania town, the Phillies seemed as if they might just take a pass on this season. Until they erupted for 14 runs and a second successive victory against Cincinnati, the Phillies had shown no evidence of life. Their vital signs were as comatose as their third-base coach's signs were unproductive.''We just haven't hit,'' General Manager Ed Wade was saying as the Phillies began their game against the Reds last Thursday.Wade was explaining his team's putrid first month. ''It's nothing more complicated than that,'' he said. ''Collectively, we've gotten off to a horrible start offensively. It's tough to win games when you're not scoring. Looking back at our club coming out of spring training, you wouldn't figure it was a team that couldn't score runs.''The night before, the Phillies defeated the Reds for only their third victory in the last 15 games, and they had raised the National League's lowest batting average by .003 to .230. But even after they erupted with a 21-hit barrage before Wade's eyes and sent the team average soaring to .242, they remained the league's lowest-scoring team.They also ended their series with the struggling Reds and began a three-game weekend series with the Atlanta Braves, whose lead over them, 11 games following the split of the first two games, is the largest margin in the major leagues. A groundhog couldn't have dug a deeper hole.''We can't go back and change a 7-17 April,'' Wade said. ''We realize what that means. We can't do anything about it. I think some people would like us to throw up our hands and surrender. But we don't do that. Our guys aren't made that way.''Players, however, tend to try to do too much when confronted with rampant adversity. A player in an 0-for-18 slump tries to get three hits in one at-bat. Teams distant from first place try to make up six games in one night.''I think it's been impressed upon them that we can't approach it that we're going to make up for 7-17 in four days,'' Wade said. ''We have to continue to play the game the right way and hopefully mount up more wins than losses. We need a couple teams in our division to slow down a little bit. I know they ran off a 15-game streak, but the Braves hopefully can't do that another time or two.''If the Phillies harbor thoughts of upending the Braves this season, they can put their efforts to better use, like trying to catch the Mets, who have had their own nightmarish experience since winning nine in a row, a streak that now seems a little less remote than ancient history.The Phillies played their first 23 games without Curt Schilling, their No. 1 pitcher and the soul of the team. Last season the Phillies resembled a wild-card contender until Schilling went on the disabled list with an ailing right shoulder.They were four games back in the wild-card race when Schilling pitched for the last time before going on the disabled list in August. When he returned nearly four weeks later in September, they trailed the Mets by 13 1/2 games.Returning last week following off-season shoulder surgery, Schilling, who last night pitched an 11-hit shutout against the Braves, is viewed as a catalyst who can stir the team. Wade sees that possibility, but he expressed a cautionary note.''People are trying to link our problems in the latter stages of last season with the problems at the beginning of this season,'' the general manager said. ''I think they're unrelated.''Not even Schilling has repeatedly won games in which the Phillies scored no more than three or four runs, an offensive development that occurred in 19 of the first 25 games. With basically the same hitters last season, the Phillies finished in the top half-dozen teams offensively.But they went to Atlanta last in total bases and only one home run ahead of the lowest home run total. They had been last in home runs before Mike Lieberthal and Rob Ducey connected against the Reds on Thursday for the team's first home runs in six games.Last season, Lieberthal, Doug Glanville, Bobby Abreu and Alex Arias were the team's .300 hitters. Right now only Abreu is on that level. A five-hit game Thursday raised Glanville's average by 34 points to .284; it's now .286. Lieberthal is up to .275. Arias is hitting .088. Others not contributing offensively included Ron Gant (.231), Desi Relaford (.213) and Kevin Jordan (.159).''We feel good and continue to feel good about our lineup,'' Wade said. ''The best alternative we have right now is to be patient. The wolves at this point have a lot of suggestions about knee-jerk reactions we should be having. But you can't make decisions based on knee-jerk reactions. The dumbest thing we could do is be impatient and make moves based on what has happened.''Expos' Express StallsThe Montreal Expos seemed to be off to a promising season. Then they arrived in Colorado. The Expos, with a 14-9 record, should have been suspicious; the Rockies had just scored 29 runs in a three-game series with the Mets, even though they lost two of the games. But Colorado did not lose any of the three games with the Expos, amassing 43 runs and 55 hits.''It's not like you can't explain it,'' said Jim Beattie, the Expos' general manager, a witness to the series in Colorado. ''You can explain it. We just didn't pitch well. I don't know if we go in there and say we can't pitch here. We pitched up. We hung a lot of sliders, breaking balls, changeups. We didn't pitch inside well. Jeffrey Hammonds hit a grand slam on an 0-2 fastball. We just didn't locate fastballs. That has nothing to do with pitching in Denver or anywhere else. We made a lot of bad pitches. So it's explainable.''Indians Look to ReboundThe joke could be on the Indians. Frustrated by their failure to win a World Series, the Indians fired Manager Mike Hargrove and named Charlie Manuel, their hitting coach, to replace him. General Manager John Hart said the team needed a new voice in the dugout. The problem is that new voice may be lulling the Indians to sleep.Cleveland's five-time division champions are struggling through the kind of start they thought they left behind when they became a force in the American League six years ago. This season, however, matches the start they had in 1997.That April, they were not in first place for 17 successive days. Today marks the 17th successive day they have not been in first this season. Their record is 14-13, the same as it was three years ago. The Indians went on that season to fall two outs short of winning the World Series.'That's Business'At 22, Jermaine Dye played in the World Series for the Atlanta Braves. At 26, Dye is a star for the Kansas City Royals.''It doesn't matter what team I'm on, as long as I'm in the big leagues fulfilling a dream,'' Dye said. ''It would have been nice to play my whole career in Atlanta, but it didn't work out. Maybe someday I'll get a chance to go back there, but right now I'm happy where I am.''After hitting .281 as a Braves rookie in 1996, Dye figured to be with them for a while. The next year, he said, he had a good spring and prepared to settle in, especially after David Justice and Marquis Grissom were traded late in spring training. ''I thought I was going to be slotted in to play every day,'' Dye said. ''All of a sudden I got traded'' -- two days after the other trade.Dye said he did not know how to react to being traded for the first time, especially at such a young age. But, he added: ''I knew Kansas City wanted me and liked me a lot. I just needed to go over there, put on a new uniform and realize I'm on a new team.''Dye struggled his first two seasons with the Royals; in fact, he spent part of each season in the minor leagues. But last season he blossomed with a .294 batting average, 27 home runs and 119 runs batted in. That performance set him up for what he has done early this season.Entering yesterday's schedule, he led the American League in home runs (12), doubles (13), slugging percentage (.784), total bases (91) and extra-base hits (25). He was tied for second in hits (42), tied for sixth in runs scored (24), fourth in runs batted in (29) and fourth in hitting (.362).But he was not among the leaders in outfield assists, as he was last season when his 17 assists were tied for first. ''This year I don't have any,'' he said. ''This year guys aren't running on me.''The Power CompanyBefore batters hit 931 home runs this April, the most productive April for home runs was in the 1996 season. If this season proceeds like that one, the home run frequency is very likely to slow. That April produced 2.30 home runs a game, but the average for the entire season wound up at 2.18 a game. This April's average was 2.56.Big Deals, Small NumbersThe biggest moves the Cincinnati Reds made last winter were the acquisitions of Ken Griffey Jr. and Dante Bichette. A year earlier, they traded for Michael Tucker. Those three formed the Reds' starting outfield on opening day. Griffey is hitting .211, Bichette .222 and Tucker .162.Detroit did not figure on a .225 average for Juan Gonzalez when it traded for him and offered him a $140 million contract. But then Gabe Kapler, who went to Texas in the Gonzalez trade, is hitting .200. Reggie Sanders was traded to Atlanta and is hitting .139. Mark McLemore signed with Seattle as a free agent and has a .204 average.While Derek Bell floats in the high .300's for the Mets, Roger Cedeno is hitting .202 for Houston.Some other bad early averages of players who aren't new to their teams: Tony Clark, .155; Rey Ordonez, .179; Ray Lankford, .187; Homer Bush, .192; Jose Offerman, .198; Rickey Henderson, .203; Cliff Floyd, .203; and Eric Karros, .204.BASEBALL: NOTEBOOK
Fusaichi Pegasus, the $4 million colt named for the flying horse of mythology, came flying through the homestretch at Churchill Downs today to win the 126th Kentucky Derby by a length and a half over Aptitude and give further evidence that racing has a brilliant new star.The bay son of Mr. Prospector not only became the first favorite to win the Derby since Spectacular Bid did it 21 years ago, but he also did it with style, finesse and power. And he behaved professionally, avoiding the balkiness that had threatened his career both in races and workouts.Fusaichi Pegasus, the $4 million colt named for the flying horse of mythology, came flying through the homestretch at Churchill Downs today to win the 126th Kentucky Derby by a length and a half over Aptitude and give further evidence that racing has a brilliant new star.The bay son of Mr. Prospector not only became the first favorite to win the Derby since Spectacular Bid did it 21 years ago, but he also did it with style, finesse and power. And he behaved professionally, avoiding the balkiness that had threatened his career both in races and workouts.His jockey, Kent Desormeaux, left his whip at his side and let the horse render one more virtuoso performance. And Fusaichi Pegasus glowed through this one, moving relentlessly from 15th place in the pack of 19 on the first turn until he bolted into the lead as they turned for home. He shifted inside to save ground, then shot to the outside to get into the clear, while 153,204 spectators at Churchill Downs, the second-largest crowd in Derby history, roared in wonder.''When the rail opened,'' said his English trainer, Neil Drysdale, ''he took flight. Then he had to wait for his chance to go outside, and he did. He's a very talented horse.''Drysdale, who missed his one previous chance to win the Derby in 1992 when the second favorite, A. P. Indy, was scratched with a bruised foot on the morning of the race, completed a week of high success.He was elected to racing's Hall of Fame on Tuesday, and won America's most prestigious race four days later, following the exact path taken last year by the trainer D. Wayne Lukas.The man who paid the $4 million to buy the horse as a yearling, Fusao Sekiguchi, a 65-year-old venture capitalist from Tokyo, said through an interpreter, ''When I laid eyes on this colt, I knew he was going to be a Derby winner.''Then, looking ahead to the Preakness in two weeks and the Belmont Stakes three weeks later, he said, ''As an owner, yes, I would like to challenge for the Triple Crown.''Desormeaux, who won the Derby two years ago aboard Real Quiet, gave an emotional tribute to ''a brilliant horse,'' and said with enthusiasm: ''When Mr. Sekiguchi put his money on him, he was just a pretty horse. But this pretty horse can run.'' Then, with poetic flair, the jockey added: ''He floated around there, and we became one.''Fusaichi Pegasus ran the mile and a quarter in 2:01 for the sixth-fastest time in Derby history, and he had to turn on the heat against a cast of exceptional rivals. Aptitude, who ran third behind Fusaichi Pegasus in the Wood Memorial in New York three weeks ago, finished strongly for second place, four lengths in front of Impeachment, with More Than Ready fourth. Drysdale's other entry, War Chant, never threatened and finished ninth.The winner, who has now won five of six races, crushed the dreams of a full cast of dreamers who made the Derby a storybook scenario.Jenine Sahadi failed to become the first female trainer to win the Derby when The Deputy, winner of the Santa Anita Derby, never fired and finished 14th.''He did his best,'' she said. ''He didn't have any real trouble. He just didn't fire.''Todd Pletcher, entering his first Derby with four horses, saw them finish third (Impeachment), fourth (More Than Ready), 11th (Trippi) and dead last (Graeme Hall). But the 32-year-old onetime assistant to Lukas remained positive, saying:''We showed we belonged here. When More Than Ready cut the corner into the stretch, my heart started pumping. The distance may have been just a little far for More Than Ready. Not as much as everyone said, but a little far. Impeachment is a late bloomer. He was beginning to show interest in the stretch. He bulled his way down the rail and closed a ton of ground. All in all, it was a pretty good day.''But it was a day of mixed emotions for the sentimental star of this year's class of 3-year-olds, Hal's Hope, the winner of the Florida Derby, and his 88-year-old breeder, owner and trainer, Harold Rose. The rags-to-riches colt led the field with his front-running speed for half a mile in 454/5  seconds, three-quarters in 1:094/5  and one mile in 1:353/5 . But then he tired and dropped back, fading to 16th place and puncturing his owner's hope.''When I saw the fractions, I got nervous,'' Rose said. ''You just can't go that fast. I did think he would run a little better, but he just went too fast too early. I guess we go back home with him. I don't know what's next right now.''Then there was Wheelaway, who sprang into prominence when he won the Tampa Bay Derby in March and finished third behind High Yield in the Blue Grass. He made a run from eighth after half a mile, then gradually moved to sixth after three-quarters of a mile, fifth after one mile and third entering the stretch. But he was overrun by the closers, and finished fifth.''I just collared Captain Steve and thought at the three-sixteenths pole that I'm the winner of the Kentucky Derby,'' the jockey Richard Migliore said. ''I hit him to ask for a little more, and he went inside and slowed me up. But it was the biggest rush I ever had.''Another story line centered on two colts from the Middle Eastern emirate of Dubai: China Visit, who finished sixth, and Curule, who ran seventh. They were regarded with some suspicion by many racing analysts because they had only six races between them, all but one of them in Dubai, where the Maktoum family expressed determination to extend its racing empire. They didn't, but both horses ran strong races and perhaps moved Sheik Mohammed al-Maktoum and his brothers closer to their goals.The trainer Bobby Frankel, gratified that Aptitude ran second to the favorite after running third in the Wood, said: ''He ran great, but he just got outrun. We're going to the Belmont, but we're not going to the Preakness.''Lukas, who has entered 38 horses in the Derby in 20 years and won with four of them, watched with dismay while his three starters struck out: Exchange Rate ran 12th, High Yield 15th and Commendable 17th. And High Yield had run in the money in 11 of his 12 starts.''They ran flat for whatever reason,'' he said. ''You know, there is always an explanation of some kind. We've been there before. I was disappointed in all three of them because all trained so well for the race. But you know, it's a horse race, and sometimes it's unexplainable.''But to Desormeaux, the Kentucky Derby was very explainable.''Once we straightened away and I got him in the clear,'' the winning jockey said, ''I kissed at him and asked him to run, and he accelerated. And it was over at that point. He took off like the best horse I've been involved with at this stage of the game.''FINISH LINESSaturday's telecast of the Kentucky Derby marked the end of a long run for ABC, which had been the Triple Crown network for many years. Next year the Derby will move to NBC as part of a five-year Triple Crown package. Race officials hope the switch will provide more promotion and exposure for the Derby, which has had declining ratings. The Derby, however, falls in the middle of the National Basketball Association playoffs, which NBC also televises. Churchill Downs officials realize their telecast may be sandwiched between N.B.A. games -- for better or worse. . . . A former president and a presidential candidate were Derby guests of WILLIAM FARISH, the Churchill Downs president. Former President GEORGE BUSH and his son Gov. GEORGE W. BUSH of Texas joined Farish, a friend of the Bushes. The former president had been to the Derby before; his son made his first visit.HORSE RACING
When Pedro Martinez tried to support his teammates, he got suspended. When they failed to support him, he picked up a loss.The Boston Red Sox ace matched a career-high with 17 strikeouts yesterday, but was outdueled by Steve Trachsel, who pitched a three-hit shutout to lead the Tampa Bay Devil Rays to a 1-0 victory.When Pedro Martinez tried to support his teammates, he got suspended. When they failed to support him, he picked up a loss.The Boston Red Sox ace matched a career-high with 17 strikeouts yesterday, but was outdueled by Steve Trachsel, who pitched a three-hit shutout to lead the Tampa Bay Devil Rays to a 1-0 victory.''He goes out there and pitches that way, and we can't score one run to support him,'' Red Sox first baseman Brian Daubach said. ''I feel almost as bad as last year, when we lost in the playoffs.''The loss ended Martinez's 13-game winning streak, and he'll have an extra day to stew over it: The Red Sox announced in the ninth inning that he had withdrawn the appeal of his five-game suspension and will start serving it today. He is scheduled to pitch Friday, one day later than normal.''Probably the best thing to do is move on, put things behind us,'' Boston Manager Jimy Williams said. ''Go ahead and serve the five games and then pitch.''Martinez (5-1) fanned six batters through two innings and had 12 strikeouts after five. The 17 strikeouts were the most in the majors this season and matched Martinez's 17-strikeout one-hitter against the Yankees on Sept. 10.''When he took the mound, he decided he wasn't going to give an inch,'' said Trachsel (2-2), who walked three and struck out a career-high 11 for his third career shutout. ''I knew it was going to be a tough game.''Martinez struck out Miguel Cairo to start the eighth for No. 16, then Gerald Williams grounded out before Dave Martinez singled and stole second. Vaughn worked the count full before singling to center.Martinez was making his scheduled start despite receiving a five-game suspension on Wednesday, three days after he hit Cleveland's Roberto Alomar with a pitch. He was allowed to pitch pending the appeal.''He decided to do that because this allows him to take his regular turn Friday in Baltimore,'' said Dan Duquette, the Red Sox general manager. ''It's better for us that Pedro is focused on his next start rather than go through the process.''INDIANS 8, BLUE JAYS 6: Catcher Einar Diaz hit a go-ahead two-run single in the eighth inning and Cleveland ended its six-game losing streak.Diaz is hitting .447 (21 for 47) since replacing Sandy Alomar in the starting lineup. Alomar, who is on the 15-day disabled list with a strained right hamstring, could rejoin the Indians on Monday.Homer Bush's run-scoring double gave Toronto a 6-5 lead in the seventh, but the Indians rallied for two runs on Diaz's single. Toronto starter Chris Carpenter left after walking Jim Thome. Reliever Paul Quantrill then gave up a hit to Richie Sexson and walked Travis Fryman before Diaz singled to right.Quantrill (0-1) took the loss. Ricardo Rincon (1-0) pitched one-third of an inning for the victory.TWINS 6, TIGERS 1: The return of Manager Phil Garner and third baseman Dean Palmer didn't help Detroi.Mark Redman pitched seven strong innings as host Minnesota beat Detroit in the first game following the end of a pair of eight-game suspensions imposed on the two Tigers.Garner and Palmer were penalized by the commissioner's office for their roles in a bench-clearing brawl against the Chicago White Sox on April 22.Palmer went 1 for 4 and committed a two-out error on Cristian Guzman's routine grounder in the fourth, leading to the Twins' third run.Detroit's Juan Encarnacion extended his major league-leading hitting streak to 18 games with an infield single in the sixth inning.Redman (2-0), making his first start this season, allowed one run and eight hits, striking out six and walking none.ROYALS 11, WHITE SOX 5: Johnny Damon hit a pair of two-run homers and went 4 for 5 for host Kansas City, which sent Chicago to its fifth loss in six games.Every Kansas City starter had at least one hit, and reliever Jerry Spradlin (1-1) allowed two hits in four shutout innings.Kansas City (15-15) reached .500 for the first time since it was 8-8 on April 19. The Royals, 13-4 at home this season, finished with a season-high 18 hits, including Mark Quinn's eighth-inning homer off Kelly Wunsch.Damon tied the score at 2-2 in the third with a homer off Mike Sirotka (2-3).Mike Sweeney singled with two outs and scored the go-ahead run on Jermaine Dye's triple, and Quinn followed with an RBI single.MARINERS 1, ANGELS 0: Mark McLemore's ninth-inning single gave host Seattle a victory over Anaheim.McLemore, who hit .274 for Texas last season, singled to center off Mike Holtz (0-1) after David Bell opened the inning with a single, Charles Gipson came in to run and Dan Wilson sacrificed.Seattle won its first 1-0 game this season, while the Angels lost their second 1-0 game.McLemore went 2 for 3 to raise his average to .218.RANGERS 11, ATHLETICS 10: Luis Alicea's run-scoring single in the ninth inning gave host Texas a victory over Oakland, the second straight game the Rangers won with both teams scoring in double figures.A day after blowing a 15-7 lead and losing by 17-16, the Athletics wasted leads of 6-1 in the third, 8-6 in the seventh and 10-9 in the ninth yesterday.AMERICAN LEAGUE: ROUNDUP
EVENTSDevotionOn the occasion of the marriage of the Renaissance aristocrats Andrea Gualengo and Orsina d'Este in 1469, Taddeo Crivelli and Guglielmo Giraldi, the foremost manuscript illustrators of Ferrara, produced a prayer book. Sometimes whimsical, sometimes pious and moving, its illuminations on pages measuring only 4 1/4 by 3 1/8 inches combine the spirituality of the Middle Ages with Renaissance naturalism. Regarded as the greatest Italian manuscript in the J. Paul Getty Collection, the Gualenghi-d'Este Hours goes on view tomorrow at the Getty Center in Los Angeles as the focus of a new exhibition. Through July 30, ''The Gualenghi-d'Este Hours: Art and Devotion in Renaissance Ferrara'' includes related objects from the British Museum in London, the National Gallery in Washington and the Museo Civico of the Palazzo Schifanoia in Ferrara, Italy. Information: (310) 440-7300.EVENTSDevotionOn the occasion of the marriage of the Renaissance aristocrats Andrea Gualengo and Orsina d'Este in 1469, Taddeo Crivelli and Guglielmo Giraldi, the foremost manuscript illustrators of Ferrara, produced a prayer book. Sometimes whimsical, sometimes pious and moving, its illuminations on pages measuring only 4 1/4 by 3 1/8 inches combine the spirituality of the Middle Ages with Renaissance naturalism. Regarded as the greatest Italian manuscript in the J. Paul Getty Collection, the Gualenghi-d'Este Hours goes on view tomorrow at the Getty Center in Los Angeles as the focus of a new exhibition. Through July 30, ''The Gualenghi-d'Este Hours: Art and Devotion in Renaissance Ferrara'' includes related objects from the British Museum in London, the National Gallery in Washington and the Museo Civico of the Palazzo Schifanoia in Ferrara, Italy. Information: (310) 440-7300.GreeningWho says the celebration of things Irish must be confined to St. Patrick's Day? Certainly not the Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts in Washington, where a 15-day festival of Irish arts begins on Saturday night at 8. ''Island: Arts From Ireland'' encompasses dance, music, film, drama, poetry, visual arts and readings. The gala opening concert, with the author Frank McCourt as host, focuses on the links among the music of Ireland, Scotland and the United States from the mid-19th century to the present. Featured performers include Mary Black, Elvis Costello, Emmylou Harris, Maighread and Triona Ni Dhomhnail, Ricky Skaggs and members of the Riverdance company. Information: (800) 444-1324.Diamond JubileeWith Vice President and Mrs. Gore as honorary chairman and chairwoman, a gala performance at the Metropolitan Opera House at 6:30 tonight opens the 60th season of American Ballet Theater. The program will feature the New York premiere of Twyla Tharp's ''Variations on a Theme by Haydn'' and excerpts from the season's full-length ballets and repertory favorites like ''Le Corsaire,'' ''Theme and Variations'' and Kevin McKenzie's production of ''Swan Lake.'' Information: (212) 362-6000.AmericanaOn any list of terrific songs, ''Swanee,'' ''Toot, Toot, Tootsie, Goodbye'' and ''Lullaby of Broadway'' can claim space. Songs like these can be heard in the Winter Garden at the World Financial Center on three consecutive Mondays beginning at 6:30 tonight. The event, with Ivy Austin as the host and a performer, is ''Songs From Shubert Stages: A Centennial Celebration of the Shubert Organization.'' The commemoration of music heard at Shubert theaters on Broadway and across the country begins with a program featuring Christine Ebersole and Richard Muenz. Information: (212) 945-0505.LAWRENCE VAN GELDER
One great cultural divide in our nation's capital is between the ostensibly off-the-record white-tie Gridiron dinner, which has been roasting presidents for 115 years, and the star-studded, made-for-TV affair of the White House Correspondents Association.The Gridiron, run by 60 of the Washington newspaper elite, is steeped in a bipartisan tradition of good-humored satire; it ''singes but never burns.'' The much larger W.H.C.A. affair, which properly includes electronic media, has been known to get out of hand, not only in oratorical taste but in the hot-tickety competition of its follow-up parties.One great cultural divide in our nation's capital is between the ostensibly off-the-record white-tie Gridiron dinner, which has been roasting presidents for 115 years, and the star-studded, made-for-TV affair of the White House Correspondents Association.The Gridiron, run by 60 of the Washington newspaper elite, is steeped in a bipartisan tradition of good-humored satire; it ''singes but never burns.'' The much larger W.H.C.A. affair, which properly includes electronic media, has been known to get out of hand, not only in oratorical taste but in the hot-tickety competition of its follow-up parties.Though a few singers are pros, the pencil fogies of the Gridiron dress in outrageous costumes and put on an amateur-theatrical set of skits and songs. (In this, my rookie year as a member, I appeared in a bunny suit, grimly determined to demonstrate good-sportsmanship.) The W.H.C.A. features instead a performance by a celebrated emcee. At both dinners, the highlight is the response of the main satiric target, who is frequently the president or vice president.Here is where a difference in the cultural style of Washington audiences illustrates the difference between political wit and political humor.In olden times, roasted pols responded with witty speeches replete with self-deprecating ''in'' jokes, often written by Liz Carpenter or Paul Keyes, a Gridiron tradition continued this year as Democrat Bob Strauss showed how political wit could sting without overstepping. Sometimes an unexpected performance substituted for wit: Nixon and Agnew plonked out a duet on the piano, or Nancy Reagan stole the show with a song. This year, a quintet of women cabinet members, starring Janet Reno, stopped the show with ''Thank Heaven for Grown-Up Girls.''Inside-the-establishment stuff works because of the intimacy of a live performance directly in front of a usually adversarial audience. But broadcasting does not lend itself to inside-the-brainwaves wit; as the physicist Werner Heisenberg uncertainly theorized, the wide observation of the comic performance changes the stimulus to laughter.Consider the performances this year of Clinton and Gore. If you watched TV last week -- from interviews with emcee Jay Leno to televised excerpts released by the White House on news programs everywhere -- you saw highlights of the undeniably boffo show put on at the W.H.C.A. dinner by the president.Clinton stimulated sympathy for his pangs of departure with well-produced outside stuff. His production culminated in a filmed scene of an abandoned Clinton running after the campaigning first lady's car, holding up a bag and shouting ''You forgot your lunch!'' Thus did the White House effectively use the forum provided by the convulsed press to show the general public that the Clintons were adept at poking fun at themselves. The humor was broad and professional, in the sure-fire style of Lucy and Desi.By contrast (and both are Democrats, so this is a nonpartisan analysis), Gore at the Gridiron emulated a style perfected two generations ago by John Kennedy at a memorable Al Smith memorial dinner in New York. Hard to believe, but Gore, like J.F.K., played to the people in the room with an unexpectedly light touch, using lines attuned to his politically sensitive audience.Everyone present knew that Gore's greatest campaign vulnerability is his denial of prior knowledge about illegal fund-raising. Many in the audience were aware he had claimed to have been out of the room when his aides were discussing this; he had even suggested he may have been off to the john after drinking a lot of iced tea. Few accept this.So Gore reportedly stepped to the lectern and asked for a glass of iced tea. Small laugh. He took the glass and slowly drained it all the way to the bottom, as the tittering grew. Then he carefully returned the glass to the waiter and delivered the punch line: ''I can't stay long.''That went over as nicely suggestive but clean, topically pointed and disarmingly self-directed. Just as Clinton's ''You forgot your lunch!'' was designed to elicit a belly laugh from a national audience, Gore's ''I can't stay long'' was intended to induce a grudgingly appreciative chuckle from an opinion-molding audience.One was broadcast humor, the other political wit. That's the difference in responses at two press dinners that seem cultural worlds apart.
Gov. George W. Bush has never been considered much of a wordsmith. But bit by bit, he is developing a political dictionary all his own.For example, when Vice President Al Gore distorts the Texas governor's record and proposals, at least as Mr. Bush sees it, Mr. Gore is not ''lying,'' two syllables that never escape Mr. Bush's lips. Rather, Mr. Gore is behaving in a manner that is ''disappointing,'' four syllables that the governor much prefers and has begun to use ad nauseam.Gov. George W. Bush has never been considered much of a wordsmith. But bit by bit, he is developing a political dictionary all his own.For example, when Vice President Al Gore distorts the Texas governor's record and proposals, at least as Mr. Bush sees it, Mr. Gore is not ''lying,'' two syllables that never escape Mr. Bush's lips. Rather, Mr. Gore is behaving in a manner that is ''disappointing,'' four syllables that the governor much prefers and has begun to use ad nauseam.And while Mr. Bush, the de facto Republican presidential nominee, says that he will soon identify numerous ways in which the government can save money, none of these plans will be ''cuts,'' a four-letter word that the candidate avoids. They will be ''savings'' that make the government more ''efficient'' -- kinder, gentler terms.It is a name game all the more interesting for the fact that Mr. Bush, with little smiles and wiggles of his eyebrows, wholly acknowledges that he is playing it. And this unspoken but unmistakable admission has precipitated endless rounds of semantic jousting between Mr. Bush and reporters, who are constantly trying to get him to say what he clearly means.On his campaign plane on Wednesday, as he flew from Austin to Palm Springs, Calif., he said the vice president was demonstrating a predilection to ''stretch the truth.''Was that not the same as lying?''I'm just disappointed,'' Mr. Bush said, with a ''nice-try'' twinkle and grin. ''I think that's the word I'd like to use. It's a disappointing thing.''Mr. Bush, a savvy enough candidate, understands that in politics, diction establishes tone, and tone is everything. And he turns to euphemisms to resolve inherent tensions in his campaign, like his pledge to run a positive race and his simultaneous resolve to wage an aggressive fight that exposes what he believes to be Mr. Gore's shortcomings.He did the same thing in the primaries, watering down the nouns and verbs he used to describe and disparage his principal opponent, Senator John McCain of Arizona. Mr. Bush's mantra at the time was that Mr. McCain ''says one thing and does another.''Did that not make the Arizona senator a ''hypocrite''?Mr. Bush flinched at the mere suggestion. No, he said, it made the senator a man practiced in the ways of ''Washington,'' a word that was perhaps dirtier but much less explicitly mean-spirited.Support From Far AwayThroughout the Republican primaries, the Bush campaign trumpeted seemingly any and every endorsement, whether it came from the governor of a large state or the secretary of a small sewing circle.But last week, the Bush campaign took that tendency to the outer limits.Mr. Bush showed reporters in the back of his campaign plane a recent copy of Weekly World News, a supermarket tabloid, with a cover story on the extraterrestrial support he was receiving. The front page featured a photograph of the governor standing beside an oblong, hairless, vaguely reptilian space alien.This was not to be taken lightly. As the newspaper noted, the same intergalactic kingmaker had backed Bill Clinton when he was first elected president in 1992.And as Mr. Bush noted, his alien encounter was further proof of his commitment to expanding the Republican Party's appeal.''New faces, new voices,'' he said as he held the front page high. ''It goes to show I'm willing to reach across certain demographic lines.''Earthier ExchangesThe exchange also went to show what a prankster and funnyman Mr. Bush fancies himself, a persona on vivid display last week.Mr. Gore was hurling accusations and put-downs in the governor's direction, and Mr. Bush was laughing, establishing a contrast that may not have been accidental in the least.His humor was broad. Asked by reporters during an airborne news conference one afternoon if he would be giving a lengthy stump speech at the airport in Palm Springs, he blanched.''Not outdoors!'' he gasped, alluding to the desert heat and one of its less attractive effects on the human body. He tugged at the portion of his dress shirt covering his underarms.  ''Pit city,'' he said.He recalled his exodus from Washington the week before, after several campaign stops there, and how one local man reacted to the passing of yet another motorcade by pulling down his pants.But Mr. Bush said the man was really ''mooning authority.''The governor seemed a bit less sanguine when the topic turned to a profile, in a major magazine, of the campaign's chief strategist, Karl Rove. Mr. Bush has a thing about advisers eclipsing the candidates they serve.And he jokingly wondered what he should expect next: a Playgirl magazine pictorial of his campaign manager, Joe Allbaugh? Mr. Allbaugh is older and burlier than a typical centerfold, but Mr. Bush had a vision.''I'm going to have him wear a bikini bathing suit,'' he said.
The latest numbers offered a stunning contradiction: a 3.9 percent unemployment rate, the lowest in 30 years, and two major national polls showing Gov. George W. Bush of Texas leading Vice President Al Gore by 5 percentage points.To put that contrast in perspective, the last time a president's party lost the White House in good times was 1920. And even then, the country was recovering from the double-digit inflation of World War I.The latest numbers offered a stunning contradiction: a 3.9 percent unemployment rate, the lowest in 30 years, and two major national polls showing Gov. George W. Bush of Texas leading Vice President Al Gore by 5 percentage points.To put that contrast in perspective, the last time a president's party lost the White House in good times was 1920. And even then, the country was recovering from the double-digit inflation of World War I.So why isn't the booming economy blowing Mr. Bush away? Have the rules changed?Perhaps.First, the economy has stayed strong so long that most people are not worrying about it. Peter D. Hart, a Democratic pollster, said, ''It doesn't sit there as a major worry that people talk about.'' Robert Teeter, a Republican pollster who collaborates with Mr. Hart on the NBC News/ Wall Street Journal poll, said one reason for Bush support among older people was that ''only about 6 percent of the old people have economic worries.''Second, Mr. Gore does not get credit for the way things are. Polls show the public gives it to President Clinton and Alan Greenspan, chairman of the Federal Reserve Board.That may be reasonable enough, but Mr. Gore's own weakness as a candidate compounds that problem. After all, Mr. Gore is campaigning on a promise to keep the same economic policies Mr. Clinton has followed, while Mr. Bush's central campaign message is that he wants a very big tax cut.But the NBC/Journal poll showed that only 27 percent of voters thought Mr. Gore was very likely or fairly likely to pursue policies that would keep the economy strong, compared to 32 percent who said that of Mr. Bush. (Both of them enjoyed less credence than they did in December, when 36 percent had confidence in Mr. Gore and 43 percent in Mr. Bush.)The NBC/Journal poll had Mr. Bush ahead, 46 percent to 41 percent. A Gallup Poll for CNN and USA Today had the Bush lead at 49 to 44. Both polls were taken the last weekend of April, and the margin of sampling error for the NBC/Journal survey was plus or minus three percentage points, one less than for the Gallup Poll.Mr. Gore has simply not capitalized on winning his party's nomination more easily than Mr. Bush won his or achieving quickly the party unity and support from Bill Bradley that Mr. Bush is still seeking from Senator John McCain.Mr. Teeter said the data in the NBC/Journal poll explained it. ''Gore is not a very good candidate,'' he said. ''He is not a very likable candidate.'' Mr. Teeter argued that Mr. Gore's frequent attacks on Mr. Bush ran the risk ''of looking like the guy who is out of his time,'' out of step with an optimistic country.Though Mr. Teeter agreed that a strong economy was a major factor in retaining a president or his party, he said the most ''likable'' candidate had won most postwar elections. The clearest exception was 1968, when a losing war, civic turmoil and rising inflation helped Richard M. Nixon edge out Hubert H. Humphrey. In 1976, Mr. Teeter said, both Jimmy Carter and President Gerald Ford seemed likable.Still, these are early days. When the nomination contests ended in March, public interest in the campaign plummeted, and surveys by the Vanishing Voter project of the Joan Shorenstein Center on the Press, Politics and Public Policy at Harvard University show that knowledge about the candidates has also declined.There is no question that the Gore message in the summer and fall will emphasize continuity and accuse Mr. Bush of risking prosperity for a needless tax cut. Comparisons with the last Republican administration are inevitable, but will have special bite because the phrase ''Bush recession'' will surely be used.Mr. Hart, while conceding Mr. Gore's weak standing, cited a focus group he conducted last Tuesday in a Philadelphia suburb as offering hope for Mr. Gore. Everyone in the group of 12, whether he or she favored Mr. Bush or Mr. Gore, ''wanted the same policies,'' he said. ''They didn't want to tinker with the economy.''''Al Gore is sitting on a gusher,'' Mr. Hart said, if he can find a way to identify himself with the voters' desire for continuity.The best evidence that it is not too late for Mr. Gore comes from a New York Times/CBS News Poll taken in May 1988. That was the last time a vice president ran to succeed a popular president in an economic boom. Gov. Michael S. Dukakis led Vice President George Bush, 49 percent to 39 percent. It did not last.
This was the year that the hip-hop singer with a dragon tattoo stole the spotlight from the folk dancers.He called himself Double O, and he strutted in a black tank top across the stage at yesterday's Asian Pacific American Heritage Festival, his left arm emblazoned with a blue dragon. As a deep bass pounded across Union Square Park, he ripped into rhyme. ''I'm what you want, what you need,'' he sang. ''Oh baby, please come home with me.''This was the year that the hip-hop singer with a dragon tattoo stole the spotlight from the folk dancers.He called himself Double O, and he strutted in a black tank top across the stage at yesterday's Asian Pacific American Heritage Festival, his left arm emblazoned with a blue dragon. As a deep bass pounded across Union Square Park, he ripped into rhyme. ''I'm what you want, what you need,'' he sang. ''Oh baby, please come home with me.''''It's like the Asian urban outlet that was never exposed before,'' he said to a reporter as he kissed a female fan after the show. ''I think we're on the tip of the iceberg. I think it's going much farther.''In recent years, acts like Double O have gradually taken center stage at the 21-year-old festival, edging out more traditional fare like Korean folk drumming and Malaysian dancing. Chalk it up to younger organizers taking over the programming and a younger audience attending  the event. Since 1997, organizers said, more professionals in their 20's have dropped by, more companies focusing on that market have paid for banners and booths and more contemporary performers have been brought in.The changes mirror larger trends in certain segments of New York's Asian-American community -- namely, the growing visibility of young Asian-American professionals in what is considered mainstream culture, and the emergence of popular art forms that voice their sensibilities.Many of the thousands who attended yesterday's festival came with cell phones, sunglasses and slick hair, and they were less interested in the martial arts demonstrations than in the erotically charged lyrics of Double O.''We want to make sure the general audience and our community see a reflection of what we are today,'' said Chuck N. Lee, one of the festival organizers. ''That's why we have the contemporary stuff.''The festival was started in 1979 by the Coalition of Asian Pacific Americans when President Jimmy Carter designated Asian-American Heritage Week. (President George Bush later expanded the designation to encompass the month of May). For many years, it drew several hundred people, most of whom had ties to the 30 or so nonprofit groups that set up booths. These included organizations like the Chinatown Health Clinic and the Basement Workshop, an arts collective.Most of the festival financing came from state grants, fund-raisers and rents for the booths. But since the late 1980's, corporate sponsorship has become increasingly common. That backing has only intensified in recent years, especially as many companies have become aware that Asian-Americans have the highest average household income of any ethnic group in the nation -- $46,637 in 1998, according to the United States Census Bureau.Although nonprofit groups still dominated the 100 or so booths yesterday, many business executives said events like the festival provided convenient access to the Asian-American market, which is otherwise not easily reached. There are virtually no magazines or television shows that cater specifically to it, unlike for the African-American or Hispanic population.''We want to show support for the event, to help fund it and bring in artists,'' said Betty Huang, marketing director of Community Connect, which operates a Web site called Asianavenue.com. ''On the other side, it's a good way for us to get our name out there.''And those coming to the festival are increasingly younger, and more  have full-time professional jobs that are not associated with the nonprofit groups, said Ramon Gil, president of the group running the festival.Scholars say this change reflects a general demographic shift in the last decade or so within many Asian-American communities. Immigration laws passed in 1965 have resulted in more white-collar immigrants entering the country and an entire generation of children growing up in the United States in the 1980's and entering the workplace.But the increasing commercial presence at the festival has raised concerns among some people who worry that corporations may overshadow the work of nonprofit groups.And when the visibility of the professional Asian-American class increases in mainstream culture, the awareness of working class immigrants and their problems can get lost, said Robert Ku, a professor of English and of Asian-American Studies at Hunter College.But festival organizers said they had been careful to keep the event grounded in its original purpose. For instance, career-oriented groups at the festival, like the National Association of Asian-American Professionals, often run mentoring programs to help recent immigrants or students.Besides drawing a larger corporate presence, the festival's younger organizers and audience have also led to a significant shift in the entertainment lineup this year. Organizers said this was the first year that contemporary pop singers outnumbered musicians specializing in traditional Asian styles.''I think it will be encouraging for people to see that there are Asian Pacific Americans performing this nontraditional and unusual path,'' said Toni Wang, a 28-year-old aspiring diva who belted out R&B-inspired lyrics on the main stage.''She's not bad,'' said Marc Wong, 32, a computer technician at Goldman Sachs, as Ms. Wang began her third song. ''Then there was that guy Double O. He didn't sound like a typical Asian-immigrant-family type of kid. He was obviously a guy who had soaked himself in a particular kind of American culture.''
Gov. George E. Pataki, hoping to keep his political choices open, has continued to raise money through two political action committees that he set up outside New York to enhance his national profile.The stated purpose of those committees, which bear the name ''21st Century Freedom,'' is to help Republican candidates around the country who share his views. But campaign records show that most of the total of $892,573 raised so far has been used to benefit Mr. Pataki by building new political alliances and subsidizing an increasingly expensive political apparatus that helped him win two terms as governor.Gov. George E. Pataki, hoping to keep his political choices open, has continued to raise money through two political action committees that he set up outside New York to enhance his national profile.The stated purpose of those committees, which bear the name ''21st Century Freedom,'' is to help Republican candidates around the country who share his views. But campaign records show that most of the total of $892,573 raised so far has been used to benefit Mr. Pataki by building new political alliances and subsidizing an increasingly expensive political apparatus that helped him win two terms as governor.The out-of-state PAC's -- one was formed under federal law, and the other in Virginia, where there are no limits on contribution amounts -- have channeled $67,433 to state and federal races outside New York. Yet they have paid at least $126,944 to Mr. Pataki's longtime pollster, Arthur Finkelstein; $118,046 to his political consultants, Kieran Mahoney and Adam Stoll; and $190,653 to a half-dozen campaign aides who are or have been on his payroll for years.Other money has been used to hire prominent Republican consultants who could help Mr. Pataki in a future run for national office. For instance, Benjamin L. Ginsberg, an elections specialist at the Washington law firm of Patton Boggs, whose clients include Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, billed $7,264 in legal fees as recently as March. Stephen Moore, an economist with the Cato Institute in Washington, received $27,500 for fine-tuning Mr. Pataki's fiscal proposals, while Peggy Noonan, a speechwriter for Presidents George Bush and Ronald Reagan, was paid $10,000 to polish his words.The money figures are the latest the committees had available. In the case of the Virginia PAC, they cover all of calendar 1999; the federal PAC's figures cover the period from January 1999 to March 31, 2000.Although Mr. Pataki has not revealed his political plans, it is clear that he commands substantial resources that could be mobilized on short notice. In the last week, politicians and lobbyists have speculated that Mr. Pataki may do just that to run for the Senate against Hillary Rodham Clinton if the probable Republican candidate, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani, is forced to drop out because of his prostate cancer.Mr. Pataki, the most successful political fund-raiser in the state's history, has brought in a total of more than $3.2 million in contributions since January 1999, including $2.4 million through his main campaign fund, Friends of Pataki, which is based in New York.He has already spent more than two-thirds of that money -- mainly on political consultants, salaries for his full-time campaign staff members, travel and fund-raising expenses -- even though he does not face re-election until 2002.''It's a complete change in culture,'' said Assemblyman Richard L. Brodsky, a Democrat from Westchester County who has criticized Mr. Pataki and Republican leaders for their aggressive fund-raising practices. ''There is no election cycle anymore; it's flat-out fund-raising from the inauguration to the next election.''Zenia Mucha, chief political adviser to Mr. Pataki, said money from all three committees had enabled the governor to travel around the country and build support for the party. ''The governor feels very strongly about promoting the Republican agenda of smaller, more effective and efficient government, lower taxes, individual freedom and other issues that are part of it,'' she said. ''We have and will continue to use these PAC's to disseminate and promote that message.''Many lobbyists and other regular contributors complain that they are paying heavily for Mr. Pataki's growing political activities. They say privately that Mr. Pataki's campaign aides have aggressively encouraged them to send donations to the Virginia or federal PAC's as a way to skirt New York's contribution limits.''Now they call and ask us to make out two or three checks instead of one,'' said a lobbyist who had given several thousand dollars to Mr. Pataki's committees but spoke on condition of anonymity because the issue had become so sensitive.Under New York election law, a corporation's contributions to all candidates and committees is limited to $5,000 a year. The law also limits an individual's donation to a governor's general election campaign to $30,700 over the four years of his term. But several corporations and individual donors would have exceeded those limits if their donations to all the committees were tallied up.Bell Atlantic, one of the state's largest employers, contributed $50,000 to the Virginia committee -- 10 times the corporate limit in New York -- in addition to $50,500 in largely unregulated soft money to the Republican Party's housekeeping committee. Although Mr. Pataki's PAC is separate from the Republican committees, they often transfer money back and forth.A real estate developer, Peter S. Kalikow, contributed $25,000 to the Virginia PAC and $12,500 to Friends of Pataki, a total of $37,500, which is more than the state's limit for individual donors. He also directed $12,500 to the Republican state committee, and his company, H. J. Kalikow, gave $5,000 to the state committee.The Virginia PAC collected $291,400, or more than half its total contributions, from New York businesses, residents and other political committees. The federal PAC, which is barred from accepting corporate donations and limits individuals to $5,000, still raised $356,073 including $138,375 from New Yorkers.Blair Horner, legislative director for the New York Public Interest Research Group, said Mr. Pataki's multiple committees had made a sham of the state's campaign finance laws. ''It essentially means there are no campaign contribution limits for governor,'' he said. ''Those who are seeking to curry favor can give as much as they want.''Ms. Mucha rejected such criticism. ''This gives us the ability under the law -- which, the last time I looked, both parties were doing -- to go out to other states and other arenas and talk about the governor's successful record in New York and the principles of the Republican Party,'' she said.To some extent, Mr. Pataki's out-of-state committees have helped finance Republican aspirations in other parts of the country. The Virginia PAC contributed $28,000 to 12 Republican candidates running for the State Legislature in New Jersey, and $28,100 to 8 Republican candidates in Virginia. The federal PAC contributed $11,333 to 11 Republicans from Vermont to Arizona who are running for federal office.But campaign records show that most of the money has been used to further Mr. Pataki's own political interests. There was little real difference in how the money was spent from the three committees -- indeed, the same political consultants drew regular payments from each one.
For months, Jim Florio has been daring Jon S. Corzine, his opponent in the Democratic primary for the Senate, to meet him in a debate. And Mr. Corzine, whose many assets do not include a gift for the sound bite, has responded as though Mr. Florio were offering to buy him a drink of hemlock: no thanks. Maybe later.Later has arrived.For months, Jim Florio has been daring Jon S. Corzine, his opponent in the Democratic primary for the Senate, to meet him in a debate. And Mr. Corzine, whose many assets do not include a gift for the sound bite, has responded as though Mr. Florio were offering to buy him a drink of hemlock: no thanks. Maybe later.Later has arrived.Until now, the New Jersey Senate contest has largely consisted of Mr. Corzine's demonizing the former governor in expensive television commercials, and Mr. Florio's indicting Mr. Corzine's Wall Street background in the newspapers, while the four all-but-unknown Republicans have been all but invisible in the news media.But with the start of the debate season this week, the two Democrats will finally engage in direct give-and-take, and the Republicans may actually get some attention.To Mr. Florio, who has been denigrating Mr. Corzine's proposals as hopelessly naive, the initial Democratic encounter on Thursday will be the first opportunity to challenge Mr. Corzine on the costs of his ambitious plans for universal health care and free college tuition, or to quiz him on the workings of Washington, where Mr. Florio spent 15 years in the House of Representatives.Mr. Florio, whose wide early lead in the polls has been eroding, can be expected to draw as sharp a contrast as possible between himself and Mr. Corzine, the former co-chairman of Goldman, Sachs & Company; in recent speeches, he has said Democratic voters must choose between an amateur politician and a professional.To Mr. Corzine, who drew national attention not long ago when he admitted making insulting remarks about Italian-Americans, whose advisers have become inured to his mangling of applause lines, and who seems to shy away from the rough-and-tumble of confrontation, the four debates scheduled with the combative Mr. Florio will pose a crucial test of mettle and preparation.To voters, the debates promise the chance for some political theater after more than a year of mere previews, since Senator Frank R. Lautenberg announced that he would not seek another term. Both Mr. Florio and Mr. Corzine are said to be a bit thin-skinned, and the two have developed a barely concealed disdain for one another.The first debate, on Monday, will showcase the Republicans: Robert D. Franks, a four-term congressman from Union County; William L. Gormley, a veteran state senator from Margate, near Atlantic City; James W. Treffinger, the Essex County executive; and Murray Sabrin, a college finance professor.Both of this week's debates, which will be taped in Trenton, are being sponsored by The New York Times and the New Jersey Network, which will broadcast them statewide.In addition to a number of candidates' forums around the state, the Republicans will debate again on May 22 on the cable channel News 12, and then on May 26 on WPVI-TV, the ABC affiliate in Philadelphia. The primary is on June 6.Aides to each of the four Republicans said they expected that the debates would be watched by relatively small numbers of likely primary voters. Rick Shaftan, a consultant to Mr. Sabrin, said the ABC telecast, scheduled for the Memorial Day weekend, seemed ''designed to guarantee minimal viewership.''But he and others said that news coverage of the events could help stir interest in what is otherwise expected to be a low-turnout election.Clifford Zukin, a pollster and professor at Rutgers, said debates rarely decided elections anywhere but at the presidential level, although he said that they could change the tone of campaign news coverage. ''Suppose something happens: flubs, gaffes, insults, someone being skewered,'' he said. ''Local TV loves that kind of thing. If that happens, then there will be the indirect effect. Local news is the sleeping 800-pound gorilla.''On the Democratic side, Gerald M. Pomper, another political science professor at Rutgers, predicted that each candidate had as much to lose as to gain in the debates.''Everybody's strengths are also their weaknesses,'' he said. ''Florio will be very informed on all kinds of policy questions, but he may seem boring and arrogant. Corzine may be less informed, and may therefore look like more of a fresh face.''Mr. Corzine has been studying for the debates as if cramming for a final exam. Robert C. Janiszewski, the Hudson County executive, said he had played the role of Mr. Florio in about five practice sessions, with Robert Shrum, a media consultant, and Steven Goldstein, a co-manager of the campaign, also taking turns acting the former governor's part.Mr. Florio has held only one practice debate, his aides said.Despite all that practice, Mr. Corzine's advisers painted Mr. Florio as the heavy favorite. ''The strategic reason for Florio to want 400 debates is he knows he's the polished, professional politician and Jon's not,'' Mr. Janiszewski said. ''I think the public's gotten weary of that. But Florio's not thinking that way. Corzine just needs to be himself.''Other supporters of Mr. Corzine stressed that voters were electing a senator, not a semanticist or a specialist on the legislative process.''If depth of knowledge about government won elections, then both Jimmy Carter and Walter Mondale would've beaten Ronald Reagan,'' said Orin Kramer, an adviser to Mr. Corzine. ''And if political debating skills won elections, Michael S. Dukakis would've beaten George Bush, and Mario Cuomo would still be governor of New York.''Still, Mr. Florio's aides said that Mr. Corzine appeared to be hedging against a meltdown before the cameras. Mr. Corzine declined an invitation to a League of Women Voters debate that was to have been carried by the ABC-TV affiliates in New York and Philadelphia.Instead, after Thursday's debate on the New Jersey Network, there will be debates on May 15 on WLIB-AM (1190), which is the premier black talk radio station in Manhattan but has only about 75,000 listeners in New Jersey; on May 16 at a synagogue in Livingston, sponsored by the MetroWest Jewish Federation, which has not even sought a broadcast partner; and on May 18 on News 12, which is available in fewer than 60 percent of the state's households.''We have a great deal of respect for NJN and Channel 12, but their viewership is low,'' said Jim Lanard, a Florio spokesman. ''We can only conclude that the Corzine campaign has made a strategic decision to keep the candidate off the broadcast TV stations.''Mr. Goldstein, of the Corzine campaign, responded: ''This is like what Roseanne Roseannadanna said: if it's not one thing, it's another. First Jim Florio, who avoided debates throughout his career, moaned and groaned about Jon not debating him. Then Jon agreed to not one, not two, but four debates. We suggest Jim Florio take a chill pill.''
Following is a partial list of church and civic leaders expected to attend the funeral of Cardinal John O'Connor at 2 p.m. today, according to officials of the New York Archdiocese:CARDINALSAngelo Sodano, Vatican secretary of state  Luis Aponte Martinez, archbishop emeritus of San Juan, P.R.  William Baum, archbishop in the Roman Curia  Anthony Bevilacqua, Philadelphia  Cahal Daly, Ireland  Francis George, Chicago  James Hickey, Washington  William Keeler, Baltimore  Bernard Law, Boston  Nicolas Lopez Rodriguez, Santo Domingo  Roger Mahony, Los Angeles  Adam Maida, Detroit  Jaime Ortega y Alamino, Havana  Norberto Rivera Carrera, Mexico City  Edmund Szoka, president of the Pontifical Commission for Vatican City StateARCHBISHOPSFollowing is a partial list of church and civic leaders expected to attend the funeral of Cardinal John O'Connor at 2 p.m. today, according to officials of the New York Archdiocese:CARDINALSAngelo Sodano, Vatican secretary of state  Luis Aponte Martinez, archbishop emeritus of San Juan, P.R.  William Baum, archbishop in the Roman Curia  Anthony Bevilacqua, Philadelphia  Cahal Daly, Ireland  Francis George, Chicago  James Hickey, Washington  William Keeler, Baltimore  Bernard Law, Boston  Nicolas Lopez Rodriguez, Santo Domingo  Roger Mahony, Los Angeles  Adam Maida, Detroit  Jaime Ortega y Alamino, Havana  Norberto Rivera Carrera, Mexico City  Edmund Szoka, president of the Pontifical Commission for Vatican City StateARCHBISHOPSSean Brady  Daniel M. Buechlein  Daniel Cronin  John Favalora  Harry J. Flynn  John P. Foley  Peter Gerety  Roberto Gonzalez  William Levada  Theodore McCarrick  Edwin O'Brien  Cormac Murphy-O'Connor  Justin Rigali  Stephen Sulyk  John VlaznyOTHER CHRISTIAN LEADERSMetropolitan Theodosius, Orthodox Church in America  Archbishop Demetrios, Greek Orthodox Archdiocese of America  Archbishop Iakovos, Greek Orthodox Archdiocese of America  Bishop Mercurius of Zaraisk, Orthodox Patriarchate of Moscow  Father Boris Komaishko, Orthodox Patriarchate of Moscow  Archbishop Khajag Barsamian, Armenian Apostolic Church  Archbishop Oshagan Choloyan, Armenian Prelacy  Archbishop Mor Kyrillos Karem, Syrian Orthodox Church  Chorbishop John Meno, Syrian Orthodox Church  Archbishop Zachariah Mar Nicholovos, Syrian Orthodox Church  Archbishop Matthias, Ethiopian Orthodox Church  Bishop Richard Grein, Episcopal Diocese of New York  Bishop Stephen Bouman, Evangelical Lutheran ChurchCIVIC LEADERS  President Clinton  Vice President Al Gore  Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani  Former President George Bush  Gov. George W. Bush  Kofi Annan, United Nations secretary general  Madeleine K. Albright, secretary of state  Andrew M. Cuomo, secretary of housing and urban development  Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan  Former Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato
More than seven years after the broccoli-bashing presidency of George Bush, vegetables and fruit still have not caught on with the public, despite the health benefits.Fewer than one-fourth of Americans eat the five daily servings of fruit and vegetables recommended by federal health officials and the National Cancer Institute, a survey has found.More than seven years after the broccoli-bashing presidency of George Bush, vegetables and fruit still have not caught on with the public, despite the health benefits.Fewer than one-fourth of Americans eat the five daily servings of fruit and vegetables recommended by federal health officials and the National Cancer Institute, a survey has found.The report, published in a recent issue of The American Journal of Public Health, found that some progress had been made in the period studied, 1990 to 1996.In the first year, only 19 percent of Americans reported eating five servings a day; in the last, 22.7 percent did.But most of that improvement, the researchers said, took place before 1994, and a leveling off has since occurred.The survey, conducted in 16 states, involved telephone calls to up to 32,000 people a year. They were asked six questions, including how often they drank juice or ate fruit. They were also asked how often they ate potatoes (French fries and potato chips did not count).Those interviewed were also asked about exercise.The highest proportion of people who met the dietary recommendations were men and women 65 and older, whites, college graduates and people who exercised.''Although progress from 1990 to 1994 was encouraging,'' the report said, the survey suggested that further efforts were needed, especially among inactive and obese people.VITAL SIGNS: NUTRITION
Happy National Teacher Day! There's still time, people, to send your children's instructor a little remembrance -- a box of cookies, a nice book, some Microsoft stock you aren't using anymore. Meanwhile let's take a moment to discuss the ever-soaring state of Standards in Education.Obviously, Higher Standards require well-qualified teachers, and it is for this reason that 39 states have adopted basic skills tests for new faculty. Unfortunately, 36 of these states waive said test when they're short on staff, leaving a certain number of students in the hands of educators who have not necessarily proven their ability to name the days of the week.Happy National Teacher Day! There's still time, people, to send your children's instructor a little remembrance -- a box of cookies, a nice book, some Microsoft stock you aren't using anymore. Meanwhile let's take a moment to discuss the ever-soaring state of Standards in Education.Obviously, Higher Standards require well-qualified teachers, and it is for this reason that 39 states have adopted basic skills tests for new faculty. Unfortunately, 36 of these states waive said test when they're short on staff, leaving a certain number of students in the hands of educators who have not necessarily proven their ability to name the days of the week.Some of you may find it strange that individuals who cannot pass a basic skills test would go into teaching in the first place. Perhaps they were lured by the opportunity, offered in many overcrowded districts, to eat lunch at 10 o'clock in the morning. Perhaps they felt peculiarly suited to a career where salaries begin, on average, at $8,000 a year less than other professions and end, on average, at $24,000 less.Nevertheless, we have not seen so much political commitment to better schools since the 1988 campaign, when George Bush and Michael Dukakis each announced he intended to become the ''education president.'' The golden age of pedagogy that everyone expected to flow from this contest somehow failed to arrive. Now Al Gore and George W. Bush trade assault e-mail on the subject every single day. Mr. Bush cannot talk enough about the way he's improved the schools in Texas. He is particularly voluble about having ended social promotion, about how he insisted that no Texas child go from the third grade to the fourth until he or she could read at grade level.''It's important to have high standards,'' he told a county Republican gathering a while back, using a Bush ian gesture that indicates the height he had in mind was about five feet.In truth, the first kids who will ever be affected by that policy are currently in kindergarten. This is the classic political approach to the setting of standards on any topic. You want to be strict about the required levels of achievement, but loose about the timetable. The ideal due date, in fact, is the year after whoever sets the standards leaves office. If Mr. Bush is lucky, by the time Texas third graders start getting held back, he'll be in Washington preparing for his re-election campaign.Amazing the things you can accomplish with long-term projections. Residents here in New York have already been informed that come 2004, the state debt will suddenly shrink to manageable proportions and our high school seniors will be able to pass challenging tests in math, english, science, history and global studies in order to graduate.In the bad old days, New York reserved what we call Regents exams mainly for students who planned to go to college. But now we're going to test everybody -- the special ed students, the kids who arrived last week from Guatemala. And why not? Every child is important, and just because he or she is going to school in double shifts or studying science in a laboratory that was built when Teddy Roosevelt was a teen doesn't mean we don't care enough to demand the very best.None of this is necessarily as crazy as it seems. Some school officials seem to be setting themselves up for a standards debacle in hopes that when the great disaster finally occurs and kids start failing in droves, an outraged public will ante up the money for smaller classes, better-paid teachers, newer buildings, etc. The only problem with this theory is that a whole generation of students will wind up being used for cannon fodder.''Everybody's worried about the kids caught in the middle,'' says Abigail Thernstrom of the Massachusetts state board of education.To be fair to Mr. Bush, Texas is actually making an attempt to set the bar higher without whopping it over the heads of the children who happen to get caught in the transition. This year the teachers started getting additional training, and the students' skills are being tested regularly so those who start to fall behind can get special tutoring. A timetable that actually prepares kids for the standards they're supposed to meet is definitely not silly.Bragging about it as if anything has actually happened, however, is ridiculous.
Handgun Control Inc., the gun control advocacy group, has begun running this 30-second advertisement in seven cities, including Austin, Tex.; Columbus, Ohio; Lansing, Mich.; Sacramento and Washington. The group says it is spending several thousand dollars to buy air time, but Republican officials assert that the amount is closer to $100,000.Handgun Control Inc., the gun control advocacy group, has begun running this 30-second advertisement in seven cities, including Austin, Tex.; Columbus, Ohio; Lansing, Mich.; Sacramento and Washington. The group says it is spending several thousand dollars to buy air time, but Republican officials assert that the amount is closer to $100,000.PRODUCER -- MacWilliams, Cosgrove, Smith, Robinson of Washington.ON THE SCREEN -- A still photo of Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, closing in tightly on his left eye. Cut to a shot in which a man is shown tucking a large silver pistol under his belt buckle. Scenes of a rustic church and children riding on a carousel dramatically break apart, like a smashed mirror, to reveal a grainy video clip of Kayne Robinson, first vice president of the National Rifle Association, talking emphatically to an audience of N.R.A. members. Concludes with a shot of the White House.THE SCRIPT -- Male announcer: ''George Bush says if you want to know what he'll do as president, take a look at his record.'' Female announcer: ''As governor of Texas, Bush signed the law that allows carrying concealed handguns for the first time in 125 years.'' Male announcer: ''And he signed the law that allows carrying those concealed handguns in churches, nursing homes, even amusement parks.'' Female announcer: ''No wonder the N.R.A. says'': (voice of Mr. Robinson) ''If we win, we'll have a president'' (here Mr. Robinson's words are spliced to bring two sentence fragments together) ''where we work out of their office.'' Female announcer: ''Tell Governor Bush: The White House is our house.'' Male announcer: ''And it shouldn't belong to the N.R.A.''ACCURACY -- It is true that Mr. Bush has often sided with the National Rifle Association in legislative battles in his more than five years as governor. Over the objections of gun control advocates, he signed legislation allowing people to carry concealed handguns, allowing handguns to be taken into churches and prohibiting local governments from suing gun manufacturers. The N.R.A.'s executive vice president, Wayne LaPierre, also recently helped raise at least $250,000 at a major Republican Party fund-raiser honoring Mr. Bush. But Mr. Bush has at times tried to distance himself from the organization, by supporting mandatory trigger locks for new handguns and criticizing Mr. LaPierre for asserting that President Clinton had tolerated a certain level of gun violence for political reasons.SCORECARD -- By trying to depict Mr. Bush as a pawn of the N.R.A., the advertisement seeks to make him seem like an extremist on gun control issues, because the N.R.A. is widely perceived as intransigently opposed to any restrictions on gun ownership. Also, it suggests that the governor is not his own man, that he is beholden to powerful right-wing interest groups. The advertisement is not being shown widely enough to affect many voters directly, but Handgun Control is clearly hoping that journalists in Washington and Texas will use it to write critical stories about Mr. Bush. The group is also running the spot in several cities with hotly contested Congressional races in which gun control may become an important issue, including Lansing and Columbus.James DaoTHE 2000 CAMPAIGN: THE AD CAMPAIGN
The latest polls show George W. Bush just a whisker ahead of Al Gore in overall voter approval ratings. But when asked about environmental protection, voters give Mr. Gore a double-digit advantage over Mr. Bush. Mr. Gore has begun to exploit this edge; in a speech last month, for example, he said Mr. Bush was only ''pretending to care'' about the environment.Other critics have attacked Mr. Bush's record, too, brandishing air quality statistics, which show that Texas ranks worst among states in total tons of air pollution.The latest polls show George W. Bush just a whisker ahead of Al Gore in overall voter approval ratings. But when asked about environmental protection, voters give Mr. Gore a double-digit advantage over Mr. Bush. Mr. Gore has begun to exploit this edge; in a speech last month, for example, he said Mr. Bush was only ''pretending to care'' about the environment.Other critics have attacked Mr. Bush's record, too, brandishing air quality statistics, which show that Texas ranks worst among states in total tons of air pollution.But as it turns out, the Texas governor's record is far better than activists allow. Governor Bush has tackled environmental problems creatively, with a new approach that emphasizes cooperation over conflict.Let's look at air quality. There are two reason why emissions in Texas are high. First, the state is large and produces much of the nation's oil and oil-based chemicals. The rest of the country enjoys the goods made possible by this production; Texas shoulders the burden.Second, Governor Bush's predecessors paid relatively little attention to air quality. Mr. Bush backed an initiative that made Texas only the third state in the nation to require pollution reductions from older power plants that had been exempted from the standards set for more modern ones. By 2003, the Bush plan aims to cut nitrogen oxide emissions, a component of smog, in half. The program included some voluntary commitments by companies, as well as requirements.This program represents a new environmentalism, which recognizes that most people and most companies want to do the right thing, and encourages them to do so through incentives.Governor Bush also expanded the ''clean industries 2000'' program, which was started in 1992 by Gov. Ann Richards. To participate, companies committed to cutting their toxic or hazardous waste in half by this year; in exchange, they may display a special environmental logo. So far, 185 companies have together eliminated more than 43 million tons of hazardous waste and reduced energy consumption by 11.3 million kilowatt hours. Through this and other programs, Texas actually led the nation in reducing toxic releases in 1997, the most recent year for which figures have been reported.During the governor's tenure, Texas has also encouraged voluntary conservation efforts. Starting with a budget of $100,000, and climbing this year to $2.5 million, a landowner incentive program is the first government plan in the country to pay qualified landowners up to $10,000 to help conserve rare species on their property. By using incentives, it has managed to do what the federal Endangered Species Act has not done -- inspire landowners to voluntarily make their land attractive to threatened animal species.Another conservation effort has helped farmers and ranchers develop plans for helping wildlife survive on  some 10 million acres. On state lands, Mr. Bush led in the creation of a privately financed endowment, bolstered by state appropriations, to restore and maintain every state park, wildlife area and fish hatchery.Some environmental groups don't like Mr. Bush's approach, which emphasizes incentives and voluntary agreements. But what matters are  results. Are pollutants being reduced? Is habitat being protected? Are old hazardous-waste sites getting cleaned up? On this score, Governor Bush's performance looks surprisingly good.Lynn Scarlett is executive director of the Reason Public Policy Institute.
As the Congressional vote on permanent normalized trade relations for China draws closer, Vice President Al Gore is stepping up his activities to promote it.As the Congressional vote on permanent normalized trade relations for China draws closer, Vice President Al Gore is stepping up his activities to promote it.He spoke more forcefully yesterday for the agreement than he usually does. And today he plans to attend a White House meeting with President Clinton and former Presidents Gerald Ford and Jimmy Carter, among others, to lobby for the measure, which Congress is to vote on later this month.Mr. Gore has been tepid in his support so far for the agreement, largely because organized labor, which backs him, opposes it. But speaking up for it serves Mr. Gore's political purposes now by helping to counter the impression, reinforced during the controversy over Elian Gonzalez, that he does not take principled stands and instead panders to those whose support he seeks.At the annual meeting of Associated Press publishers and editors yesterday in New York, Mr. Gore did not raise the China issue, but was asked about it in a question-and-answer session. Uncharacteristically, he delved into the reasons he believed the trade bill should pass; normally, when he mentions the issue at all, he gives it fairly short shrift.''This doesn't reduce any U.S. tariffs; it only reduces Chinese tariffs,'' he said at the Associated Press meeting, which was held at St. Bartholomew's Church in Midtown Manhattan.''If we turned it down,'' he added, referring to the World Trade Organization, ''it wouldn't keep China from coming into the W.T.O.; China would come into the W.T.O. anyway.''Failing to approve the trade agreement, he said, would not hurt China but would put the United States at a ''severe disadvantage'' with its own trading partners.Today, the vice president will appear in the East Room at the White House with President Clinton, former Presidents Ford and Carter, and two former secretaries of state, Henry A. Kissinger and James A. Baker III.A White House spokesman, Jim Kennedy, said that former President George Bush, the father of Mr. Gore's Republican rival, Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, was invited, but ''due to a scheduling conflict, he is not able to attend.'' Governor Bush supports the trade agreement.Mr. Gore's commitment to the matter has been in some doubt since he won the endorsement of the A.F.L.-C.I.O. last fall. He said then that he supported it, leading two of the organization's most powerful members, the Teamsters and the United Auto Workers, to withhold their endorsement of his candidacy.Mr. Gore has tried to win over James P. Hoffa, president of the Teamsters union, but Mr. Hoffa, who is up for re-election and faces his own internal politics, has recently expressed more interest in the third-party candidacy of Patrick J. Buchanan, who also opposes the treaty.Mr. Gore has said he has called some members of Congress to push them to support the treaty, but has not said how many. Aides say he has made calls from his campaign plane and from his office and that if the vice president did not want to appear in the East Room today, he would not do so, suggesting that he sees some political benefit in standing with President Clinton on an issue that the administration has advanced as important to the economy.THE 2000 CAMPAIGN: THE VICE PRESIDENT
Many suburban schools have been able to think of lagging achievement by minority students as a city problem, one far away from their comfortable test scores and solid real-estate values. Their worries about test scores usually seem to revolve around who  will be closest to the top -- whether the numbers might make, say, Chappaqua's schools look better than Scarsdale's.But when the New York State Board of Regents last week decided to grade schools based partly on how well their black and Hispanic students score, not just how students score over all, it moved the debate on standards to a far more controversial realm, one that will force suburbs to confront difficult issues about race as well as a threat to their reputations.Many suburban schools have been able to think of lagging achievement by minority students as a city problem, one far away from their comfortable test scores and solid real-estate values. Their worries about test scores usually seem to revolve around who  will be closest to the top -- whether the numbers might make, say, Chappaqua's schools look better than Scarsdale's.But when the New York State Board of Regents last week decided to grade schools based partly on how well their black and Hispanic students score, not just how students score over all, it moved the debate on standards to a far more controversial realm, one that will force suburbs to confront difficult issues about race as well as a threat to their reputations.The challenge they face is now far thornier than simply raising overall test scores, educators say. They must close the stubborn gap that leaves black and Hispanic students -- even those with well-educated and more affluent parents -- trailing their white peers.''They're going to fail a lot of districts if they do this,'' said Paul Kelleher, superintendent of schools in Lawrence, which ranks high both on the list of Long Island's wealthiest communities and on the list of districts with the largest number of poor students. ''This achievement gap is in every school, it's true even in communities that have a middle-class African-American community.''Almost every suburb has at least a small population of black and Hispanic students, but they have been able to hide low scores in an average lifted by the good performance of affluent white and Asian students. Under the new rules, which for the first time will grade every school in the state as meeting, exceeding or falling below standards, the state could declare a school with high average test scores ''below standards'' if minority students at the school, even a handful, scored low.The new grades focus on what has become known as the achievement gap by making suburban parents stakeholders in solving it. Low achievement by minority students will no longer be a remote issue; it will affect the public perception of their schools and local property values.The Regents' move reflects a change in policy that has been occurring nationwide. Five other states evaluate schools based on how well their minority students score, and the United States Senate is debating a bill this week that would require all states to do the same. The experience of other states,  particularly Texas, suggests that tying school grades to achievement by race offers hope for lifting minority achievement.In New York, however, suburban superintendents say that the new grading policy is too onerous, that it will result in failures in many traditionally good school systems that could result in middle-class parents fleeing to private schools.In two years as superintendent, Mr. Kelleher of Lawrence has focused intensely on narrowing the achievement gap, increasing teacher mentoring for minority students and creating peer support networks to try to counter the notion prevalent among many black teenagers that doing well in school is ''acting white.''Mr. Kelleher and other superintendents applaud the state for highlighting the gap. They disagree, however, with grading schools on it.''The long-term data indicates very clearly there are not quick fixes,'' said Sherry King, superintendent of schools in Mamaroneck, in Westchester County. ''I'm not sure telling us that tomorrow there will be a new report card in the public view is going to change anything.''Ultimately, superintendents say, punishing schools where minority students do not do well ends up making diversity look like a bad goal. ''When you have socioeconomically diverse communities, then you have these scores printed, it's sometimes hard to convince people that the mixes we're trying to seek are what we want,'' Ms. King said.More affluent white parents in a racially mixed school, she suggested, might think their children would be better off in another, less diverse district, or a private school.Many superintendents said that separating scores by race makes them uncomfortable.''It puts a negative spin on it,'' said Linda Kelly, the superintendent in New Rochelle, where 44.7 percent of the students are white, 30.2 percent are black and 21.2 percent are Hispanic. ''We're proud we're a gateway community. We have diversity, and we think it's the greatest kind of education.''Still, more and more educators and parents have begun focusing on the gap in the last year. In October, the College Board released an extensive report documenting the gap. Fifteen diverse middle-class communities nationwide, including Montclair, N.J., have begun sharing ideas on how to close the gap.Massachusetts and California recently decided to assess schools based on performance by race, as New York plans to do. In a presidential campaign event to mark National Teachers Day today, Gov. George W. Bush of Texas plans to discuss ways to close the gap.Texas, which for nine years has graded schools based on data broken out by race, offers the strongest evidence that the grading of schools tied to race might close the achievement gap.In schools that received poor grades, teachers began focusing more intensely on writing and math. Parents and students held pep rallies encouraging students to study hard and do well. Schools plastered the walls with sloganeering posters and reminders of tips that might come in handy on a math exam.The result: Texans ranked first among all black fourth graders in the nation on the federally administered National Assessment of Educational Progress and Hispanic Texans sixth. California's black fourth graders, by contrast, ranked 36th, and New York's Hispanic fourth graders ranked 30th.As with many tests, some critics contend that Texas teachers are merely ''teaching to the test,'' that they have become exclusively focused on test preparation. That, they say, is not the same as education.But Amy Wilkins, a policy analyst for the Education Trust, a Washington-based nonprofit group that focuses on minority and disadvantaged students, said such criticism minimized the improvements in teaching in Texas.''Some people claim this is 'drill and kill,' '' she said. ''But more, you see teachers just teaching at a higher level.''People say, 'They're so poor, you can't expect much of them,' But if the kids are going to get out of these communities, you have to push them. 'Pity the poor' is going to get these kids nowhere.''
Although the Clinton administration has made ''humanitarian intervention'' a centerpiece of its foreign policy, it has done a poor job of delivering emergency aid to the people who need it, an internal State Department report says.The ''humanitarian factor has become central to senior policy makers' deliberations over U.S. foreign policy priorities,'' the report states. But the officials who are responsible for easing human suffering in foreign crises have little influence over high-level decision making, and in some cases are deliberately shut out, the study says.Although the Clinton administration has made ''humanitarian intervention'' a centerpiece of its foreign policy, it has done a poor job of delivering emergency aid to the people who need it, an internal State Department report says.The ''humanitarian factor has become central to senior policy makers' deliberations over U.S. foreign policy priorities,'' the report states. But the officials who are responsible for easing human suffering in foreign crises have little influence over high-level decision making, and in some cases are deliberately shut out, the study says.The report, written by a top adviser to Secretary of State Madeleine K. Albright, chronicles the billions of dollars in emergency assistance that have been sent to Afghanistan, Kosovo and Sudan to help people whose lives have been disrupted by war and to Honduras in the aftermath of a big hurricane in 1998.Last year, when Serbian forces began expelling ethnic Albanians from Kosovo several days after the start of the NATO bombing campaign, senior administration officials publicly insisted that they were prepared for Serbian actions. Despite that, there was little food and shelter  on hand as hundreds of thousands of refugees flooded into Macedonia and Albania.The report describes the administration's main funnel for assistance to the expelled Kosovars, the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, as suffering from ''weak leadership'' in the region and adds that the administration was unable to change this.In Sudan, where the United States has spent more than $1 billion in the last 10 years trying to ease suffering in longest-running civil war in Africa, the report says the assistance has become so routine that it now appears to act as a substitute for peacemaking efforts to resolve the conflict.The report, initiated by Morton H. Halperin, director of policy planning at the State Department, and based on interviews with senior administration officials, is an unclassified document. But it was not made public until now.It was obtained under the Freedom of Information Act by the National Security Archive, a group that specializes in collecting government documents through requests and suits. The report was completed in January and has been submitted to Dr. Albright's office.In outlining options for improving response, the report suggests that the relief programs run by the Agency for International Development could be folded into the State Department.This is one step short of what Senator Jesse Helms, the North Carolina Republican who is chairman of the Foreign Relations Committee, has been recommending since he took charge of the panel in 1995.Mr. Helms, who favors abolishing the agency as an independent entity and putting it into the State Department, said he believed ''bringing A.I.D. into the State Department will mean more effective use of the aid,'' his spokesman, Marc Thiessen, said.On the campaign trail, the two presumptive presidential candidates have differing views of the ''humanitarian intervention'' policy. George W. Bush Jr. has said he would be much more selective in deciding where and when the United States would intervene. Vice President Al Gore supported the interventionist policy in a recent major speech. Mr. Gore was instrumental in preventing the agency from being melded into the State Department years ago.In its account of how unprepared the administration was to meet the needs of the Kosovo refugees, the report points to shortcomings by American intelligence officials.Instead of anticipating an outpouring of refugees, the administration was expecting the opposite, that nearly a million people would be displaced in Kosovo in the bombing.''The prevailing worst-case scenario was that one million Kosovars would be displaced internally, prohibited from exiting, and remain largely inaccessible, in the context of an ongoing air war and a NATO determination not to launch a ground invasion,'' the report said.As for Sudan, the report added, many in the administration believed that top officials had exerted too little effort to resolve the conflict. That has been partly caused by deep divisions in the administration on Sudan, with some favoring total isolation and even more help to rebels in the south. In addition, officials responsible for the large assistance expenditures have been excluded from crucial decisions.Officials from A.I.D. and the State Department who managed the assistance program were not consulted when the administration decided to shut the American embassy in Khartoum in the mid-1990's because of security concerns. The closing undermined Washington's ability to talk to Khartoum about helping civilian war victims, the report said.
THE ISSUESCUOMO SEEKS BUSH STAND ON GUN BILL  Housing Secretary Andrew Cuomo added his voice yesterday to the chorus of Democrats who have called on Gov. George W. Bush of Texas to clarify his position on federal legislation that would prohibit lawsuits by local governments against gun manufacturers. Mr. Bush signed such legislation in Texas, and suggested last week that he would do the same in Washington. In a telephone news conference yesterday, Mr. Cuomo, who has tried to negotiate settlements between gun makers and cities that have sued them, called Mr. Bush's remarks vague. He asserted that the gun makers, who have broken off talks in recent months, would return to the table if they knew Mr. Bush opposed such legislation. Bush aides accused Mr. Cuomo of politicizing the issue. ''Instead of spending their time distorting and misrepresenting Governor Bush's priorities, the Clinton-Gore administration ought to spend more time enforcing our existing gun laws,'' said Scott McClellan, a spokesman for Mr. Bush.James Dao (NYT)THE ISSUESCUOMO SEEKS BUSH STAND ON GUN BILL  Housing Secretary Andrew Cuomo added his voice yesterday to the chorus of Democrats who have called on Gov. George W. Bush of Texas to clarify his position on federal legislation that would prohibit lawsuits by local governments against gun manufacturers. Mr. Bush signed such legislation in Texas, and suggested last week that he would do the same in Washington. In a telephone news conference yesterday, Mr. Cuomo, who has tried to negotiate settlements between gun makers and cities that have sued them, called Mr. Bush's remarks vague. He asserted that the gun makers, who have broken off talks in recent months, would return to the table if they knew Mr. Bush opposed such legislation. Bush aides accused Mr. Cuomo of politicizing the issue. ''Instead of spending their time distorting and misrepresenting Governor Bush's priorities, the Clinton-Gore administration ought to spend more time enforcing our existing gun laws,'' said Scott McClellan, a spokesman for Mr. Bush.James Dao (NYT)THE REPUBLICANSABORTION LOOMS AS PLATFORM ISSUE  Various interests groups, especially those that support abortion rights, plan to have their voices heard when the Republican national convention this summer in Philadelphia assembles a platform for this year's nominee. Over the weekend, Gov. Tommy G. Thompson of Wisconsin, the recently selected chairman of the platform committee, offered them some thoughts. After all the hearings are held and all the testimony is heard, he said, the presidential candidate will have the last word, not the committee. ''I'm certainly going to be listening to all sectors of the party,'' Mr. Thompson told The Philadelphia Inquirer. ''But my ultimate client is George Bush, and what he feels best is what we will do.'' On the matter of abortion, Mr. Thompson said he would abide by Mr. Bush's promises to leave the current plank, which strongly opposes abortion.Irvin Molotsky (NYT)THE LIBERTARIANSELECTION COMMISSION SUED  The Libertarian Party sued the Federal Election Commission yesterday, contending that rules for participation in presidential debates are so restrictive that they unfairly exclude minor-party candidates and independents. The lawsuit, the culmination of a long series of complaints about debate regulations, argues that it is nearly impossible for less well-known and less well-financed candidates to participate because candidates who do not draw at least 15 percent in voter polls are automatically excluded. In the suit, filed in federal court in Manhattan, the Libertarians, joined by several other plaintiffs, asserted that ''there is a common interest of the Democratic and Republican Parties, implemented in part through organizations such as the Commission on Presidential Debates, to lessen the stature and legitimacy of independent and minor-party candidates.'' The commission, a nonprofit group, has run the debates since 1987. The suit also asserts that the debates violate federal law because money contributed to finance them is meant to enhance voter participation, not to support any particular party or candidate. A commission spokesman, John Scardino, said the debate qualification standards were fair and entirely legal.(NYT)THE STATESRIFT GROWS AMONG ARIZONA REPUBLICANS  It is no secret among Arizona Republicans that Gov. Jane Dee Hull's endorsement of her fellow governor George W. Bush over her fellow Arizonan Senator John McCain left bad feelings on both sides. It was bad enough that last month Ms. Hull agreed to give up the governor's prerogative of leading the state's delegation to the Republican National Convention -- after all, Mr. McCain easily won the primary, and thus the right to control the state's 30-member delegation. Now comes word that Mr. McCain wants his wife, Cindy, to lead the delegation instead. That has rankled Hull supporters. The issue is to be decided at the state party convention on Saturday.Todd S. Purdum (NYT)THE 2000 CAMPAIGN
Will they embrace as friends or briskly shake hands as embittered adversaries? Will the cameras record smiles of warmth, or ice? Will the loser deliver a qualified pledge of support for the winner, offer more lavish words of praise or perhaps utter the e-word?If politics is often about appearances, the eagerly anticipated meeting here on Tuesday between Gov. George W. Bush of Texas and Senator John McCain of Arizona is being scrutinized by political observers and reporters as closely as Egyptologists might pore over hieroglyphics.Will they embrace as friends or briskly shake hands as embittered adversaries? Will the cameras record smiles of warmth, or ice? Will the loser deliver a qualified pledge of support for the winner, offer more lavish words of praise or perhaps utter the e-word?If politics is often about appearances, the eagerly anticipated meeting here on Tuesday between Gov. George W. Bush of Texas and Senator John McCain of Arizona is being scrutinized by political observers and reporters as closely as Egyptologists might pore over hieroglyphics.In their first meeting since Mr. Bush trounced Mr. McCain in the primaries on March 7, the governor and senator are getting together at Mr. Bush's invitation for private fence-mending, public picture-taking and the expectation in the Bush camp that Mr. McCain would eventually make some kind of endorsement.That announcement could come after the meeting, aides to Mr. McCain said today.''It may or may not happen,'' John Weaver, McCain's political director, said. ''No decision formally has been made; that's the point of the meeting.''So obsessed is the political world  with how the two men get along and so starved is the national press corps for substantive campaign news that the event has taken on the proportions of a miniature summit or, a ''monster unity meeting,'' as Sam Donaldson labeled it on the Sunday morning talk show of which he is a co-host.By a Bush campaign estimate, 120 journalists had inquired about attending the news conference. Analysts have talked like color commentators about watching Mr. McCain's body language.''It's a test of leadership for Bush,'' said Tom Hannon, who oversees coverage of politics for CNN. ''In that sense, it's a purely political story; it has much to do with Bush's facility for handling it and how he handles the whole nomination process.''It is also, of course, a reflection of Mr. McCain's durable stardom, of how his moods, inclinations and peeves still carry remarkable weight. (Just last month, NBC News and a bevy of heavy-duty political writers were off with him to Vietnam.)''Politics is about ideas and strategy and tactics, but it is also about personality,'' said Mark Halperin, the political director of ABC News. ''It's extraordinary for a vanquished primary candidate to have this much perceived influence.''When Mr. McCain showed up at Waldenbooks in a shopping mall in suburban Pittsburgh today, the reporters and camera crews were so thick that it felt as if he were back in Nashua or Concord in the days before the New Hampshire primary.Mr. McCain's performance at the signing of copies of his autobiography showed how much he still enjoyed the attention. At a news conference, the senator dropped hints that he might yet endorse Mr. Bush on Tuesday: when asked if that was a possibility, Mr. McCain said, ''Sure.''''Endorse'' is the word Mr. Bush dearly wants Mr. McCain to utter when they emerge from their morning meeting at the William Penn Hotel here.And as if to keep Mr. Bush in suspense, Mr. McCain was quoted in The Pittsburgh Post-Gazette this morning as ruling out an endorsement for the time being. He told the paper that he wanted a clearer understanding of the governor's claim to be ''a reformer with results.''''That's his slogan,'' Mr. McCain said. ''I'd like to know what those are and how I can be helpful in achieving a reform agenda.''Supporters of Mr. McCain said the senator would almost certainly endorse Mr. Bush, if not today, sometime soon.Representative Lindsey Graham, a South Carolina Republican and confidant of Mr. McCain, said the two staffs should be able to meet after Tuesday's meeting and ''hone a common reform agenda'' on issues the candidates agree on like the patient's bill of rights and tort reform.As for Mr. McCain's signature issue, campaign finance reform, ''that may be the one where we agree to disagree,'' Mr. Graham added.But first, hurt feelings must be purged. In fact, in discussing the mending of the wounded egos on both sides -- Mr. McCain is still smarting over the governor's attack ads and Mr. Bush is said to remain miffed at the senator's resistance to come in from the cold -- Mr. Graham sounded more like a radio psychiatrist.''Tuesday is vitally important for the human interaction,'' Mr. Graham said. ''Some time alone, away from spin doctors and political operatives, some time to sit down and look at each other and say the things that human beings can say will do more than anything else to heal.''Mr. Bush seemed to acknowledge the need for catharsis. Speaking to reporters at La Guardia Airport in New York before attending the funeral of Cardinal John J. O'Connor, the governor said that he was ''looking forward'' to talking to Mr. McCain.''I think that whether we have an endorsement tomorrow or not is really not what's important,'' he said. ''What's important is to sit down and visit. He has said over and over that he will support me as the nominee of the Republican Party. I take him for his word.''Reporters also said they will be looking for subtle signals of how the two men, who early in the primary campaign went out of their way to praise each other and profess their strong friendship, comport themselves after their meeting.''Probably the most important thing will be body language and tone,'' said Mr. Halperin said. ''All eyes and camera lenses will be on the question of, does McCain act as if George Bush is his leader, or does he act like the independent maverick, unhappy with the way things have turned out?''It is far from customary for a vanquished contender for president to withhold formal support for this long. This year, for instance, former Senator Bill Bradley endorsed Vice President Al Gore within 48 hours of losing every state on March 7.The Democrats said they are getting a kick out of the hoops that Mr. Bush appeared to be going through to win over Mr. McCain.''It's part of the Bob Jones University Redemption Tour,'' said Joe Andrew, chairman of the Democratic National Committee, referring to Mr. Bush's efforts to distance himself from the Christian conservatives he wooed during the primaries. Mr. Andrew will hold a news conference here on Tuesday with senior citizens from across Pennsylvania, to point up discrepancies in Mr. Bush's and Mr. McCain's proposals regarding Social Security.Of course, the question of whether an endorsement by a member of one's own party is meaningful to anyone but the candidate and the people paid to write and talk about it remains an open one. To Senator Arlen Specter, a Republican whose home state is host to the meeting, the issue may be settled a lot more easily than a lot of people think: ''It's for Governor Bush to say, ''I'd like to have your support.' ''After all, Mr. Specter said, he hasn't made an endorsement, either. ''When McCain and Bush were in it together, I thought it was the better part of valor to stay out of it,'' he explained. Since then, he added, ''Nobody's asked me.''THE 2000 CAMPAIGN: THE ARIZONA SENATOR
The once-mighty Texas Democratic Party, whose fabled leaders Lyndon B. Johnson and Sam Rayburn dominated not just the state but also the nation, has fallen on very hard times.Of today's 29 officials elected statewide in Texas, none are Democrats. Senator Kay Bailey Hutchison, a Republican, faces only token Democratic opposition in her re-election campaign this year, which is more opposition than the party is providing in most statewide races. And much to the chagrin of the Democratic state chairwoman, Molly Beth Malcolm, several Democratic legislators are out campaigning with none other than the second-term governor, George W. Bush, soon to be the Republican presidential nominee.The once-mighty Texas Democratic Party, whose fabled leaders Lyndon B. Johnson and Sam Rayburn dominated not just the state but also the nation, has fallen on very hard times.Of today's 29 officials elected statewide in Texas, none are Democrats. Senator Kay Bailey Hutchison, a Republican, faces only token Democratic opposition in her re-election campaign this year, which is more opposition than the party is providing in most statewide races. And much to the chagrin of the Democratic state chairwoman, Molly Beth Malcolm, several Democratic legislators are out campaigning with none other than the second-term governor, George W. Bush, soon to be the Republican presidential nominee.''I'm disappointed they would do that,'' said Ms. Malcolm, who returned from vacation in Italy to find that her members were consorting with the enemy. ''They are not representing the Democratic Party.''Other than the most partisan Republicans, few people in Texas would argue that Democrats are powerless or obsolete, particularly since the party still controls the Congressional delegation and the Texas House of Representatives. But as Mr. Bush campaigns for the White House, Democrats are consumed by a parochial, less glamorous electoral agenda, including legislative races and preparing for the 2002 run for governor. And few elected Democrats are willing to make trouble for the popular Mr. Bush.The state's most famous Democrat, former Gov. Ann W. Richards, who spends much of her time as a Washington lobbyist, is among those who have refrained from attacking the man who defeated her in 1994. The state's most powerful Democrat,  Pete Laney, speaker of the Texas House, has so far stayed out of the presidential race. Other conservative Democrats in the Legislature either like Mr. Bush personally or are wary of antagonizing him as their districts become increasingly Republican.''There's no percentage in giving Bush a hard time,'' said Harvey Kronberg, publisher of The Quorum Report, a widely read online newsletter covering Texas politics.That detente is a timely gift for Mr. Bush as he positions himself as a coalition builder who would foster bipartisanship in Washington. By contrast, Arkansas Republicans tried to crush Bill Clinton in 1992, maligning his record and his character and leaving little doubt of their goal. ''Defeating the enemy at all costs,'' recalled Richard Bearden, then the executive director of the Arkansas Republican Party, ''and Bill Clinton was the enemy.''Unlike Arkansas, where Republicans felt little incentive to play nice with Mr. Clinton, Texas has a tradition of bipartisanship and chauvinism that for some Democrats outweighs any national party loyalties.''For most Texans, it's a no-brainer,'' one Texas Democrat, George Christian, press secretary to President Johnson, said of the 2000 race. ''It's an acceptable, bipartisan Texan running for president.''Merle Black, a political scientist at Emory University, said testimonials from home-state allies whom many voters across the country might find unexpected could provide credibility for presidential candidates introducing themselves to a national audience. Coming out of Georgia in 1976, Jimmy Carter enlisted the civil rights leader Andrew Young to help demonstrate that he was a Southern Democrat of a sort different from the race-baiting George C. Wallace.  In the same vein, Mr. Black said, Mr. Bush is enlisting Texas Democrats to help reassure voters that he is different from the combative Congressional Republicans of the 1990's.''Bush is trying to show that he's not Newt Gingrich, he's not Tom DeLay, he's not Dick Armey,'' Mr. Black said.Though the decline of the Texas Democrats has roots in the 1960's, the unequivocal slap in the face from the voters came in 1998, when the party lost every one of more than a dozen statewide races, from governor to lieutenant governor to land commissioner, and Mr. Bush won  with nearly 70 percent of the vote.So when Democratic officials announced last year that they would not field candidates for six of the eight statewide races this November, Republicans happily began writing obituaries. In April, Democratic officials were further embarrassed when a perennially losing candidate best known for his name, Gene Kelly, sought and won the party's nomination to challenge Ms. Hutchison, an overwhelming favorite.Democrats point out that they still dominate local politics in much of the state. The mayors of Dallas, Austin, Houston and San Antonio are Democrats, and the party still controls a large majority of county governments, particularly in South Texas. But Robert Black, spokesman for the Texas Republican Party, notes that while Republicans control local government in only 57 of the state's 254 counties, those 57 counties account for 56 percent of the population.An autopsy of recent Democratic misfortunes would point to money and demographics as the chief problems. Texas' huge size requires statewide candidates to raise millions upon millions of dollars in order to compete in every media market. With corporate interests favoring Republicans, said Mr. Kronberg, the online analyst, Democrats often depend on contributions from trial lawyers. And Republicans, led by Mr. Bush, have demonized the trial bar as greedy pushers of unnecessary lawsuits.''Democrats going statewide,'' Mr. Kronberg said, ''have to prove they're not pawns to trial lawyers.''As for demographics, Dan McClung, a Democratic political consultant in Houston, said large numbers of Republican-leaning white voters had moved from out of state into the suburbs of Dallas, Austin and Houston. These new voters, Mr. McClung said, were crucial in the narrow 1998 defeat of two well-known Democrats, John Sharp, who ran for lieutenant governor, and Paul Hobby, who ran for state comptroller.''We've virtually been shoved aside,'' said Mr. McClung, who worked for Mr. Hobby.With the party struggling, many Democrats agree that a high-profile effort to attack and embarrass Mr. Bush would make little sense.''Right now, our fight is not statewide,'' Mr. McClung said. ''George W. Bush is popular. He's extremely well financed. And most Texans would prefer to have a president from Texas than fight about party politics.''Ms. Malcolm, who switched from Republican to Democrat in 1992, said her party was in ''a rebuilding period.'' She said the decision not to contest most statewide races this year was a strategic one. Democrats hope instead to keep control of the House and win back the State Senate, where Republicans hold an edge of only 16 to 15. Whichever party controls the Legislature will also control Congressional and legislative redistricting, and Democrats dearly want to hold their 17-to-13 majority in the United States House.To a large extent, the immediate future of Texas politics depends on Mr. Bush's future. If he wins in November, his job will fall to Lt. Gov. Rick Perry, a Republican whose replacement would be chosen by the State Senate. As the presiding officer of the Senate, the lieutenant governor is considered the official with greatest influence over legislation, and a handful of candidates in both parties are already jockeying for position.But neither party dominates the Senate, and no one expects a party-line vote for lieutenant governor. Instead, victory will require attracting votes from both sides, and the hopefuls are making certain to avoid any partisan warfare. One of them, State Senator Ken Armbrister, was among  four Democrats who campaigned with Mr. Bush in Ohio last month.Regardless of the outcome in November, Democrats say, they are pointing to 2002 and beyond. The powerful statewide offices of governor, lieutenant governor, attorney general and comptroller are on the ballot in 2002. Mr. Bush will either be in Washington or leaving office in Austin, and Democratic officials already envision a statewide ticket that would include Mr. Sharp, Mr. Hobby and perhaps the mayors of Dallas, Ron Kirk, and Austin, Kirk Watson.Most tantalizing of all, in the eyes of many Democrats, is the possible return of former Housing Secretary Henry G. Cisneros of San Antonio.  Though he has been marred by scandal involving his payments to a former mistress, party insiders believe that Mr. Cisneros's star power and fund-raising potential remain strong in Texas.Mr. McClung and other Democrats also believe that the state's changing demographics may turn in their favor in this decade. Hispanics are expected to soon become the state's most populous ethnic group, and as yet they usually support Democrats. Mr. Bush has aggressively courted Hispanics, but Democrats believe that their appeal is stronger. In addition, college-age voters are showing renewed interest in the party. All this is the gospel that Democrats are repeating to themselves.At least one of the old lions is roaring again. Ben Barnes, a former speaker of the Texas House and lieutenant governor from the Democratic glory days, gave a recent speech at the Lyndon B. Johnson School of Public Affairs at the University of Texas in which he maintained that the state  ''is drifting toward mediocrity just when it should be striving for greatness.'' Mr. Barnes recited a litany of woes, from crumbling infrastructure to underpaid teachers to substandard health care for the poor. Noting that the state could soon have a $3 billion surplus, he warned against more tax cuts, calling for vast investment in schools and other institutions, medical research and transportation.Maybe it was a call to arms, or maybe it was just a speech.THE 2000 CAMPAIGN: THE LONE STAR STATE
After a bill-signing ceremony at the White House a few weeks ago, President Clinton pulled aside an unlikely ally in his fight to win approval for a decisive trade measure with China, the administration's top foreign policy goal.''We talked about what each of us has to do and we gave each other some advice,'' said Representative Tom DeLay of Texas, the House majority whip and perhaps Mr. Clinton's most venomous critic on Capitol Hill, who refused to divulge details of the private chat in his rare visit to the Oval Office.After a bill-signing ceremony at the White House a few weeks ago, President Clinton pulled aside an unlikely ally in his fight to win approval for a decisive trade measure with China, the administration's top foreign policy goal.''We talked about what each of us has to do and we gave each other some advice,'' said Representative Tom DeLay of Texas, the House majority whip and perhaps Mr. Clinton's most venomous critic on Capitol Hill, who refused to divulge details of the private chat in his rare visit to the Oval Office.With the vote just two weeks away, Mr. DeLay, who led the charge to impeach Mr. Clinton, now finds himself in the improbable role of the president's chief water-carrier in an all-out battle to grant China permanent normal trading privileges.If the China measure succeeds, and right now the vote is too close to call, it will be largely with the support of Republicans, who are expected to deliver about 150 of the 218 votes needed to pass it. The measure would allow American companies to benefit fully from a market-opening accord that paves the way for China to enter the World Trade Organization. Approval by the Senate appears more certain.That's why Mr. Clinton needs Mr. DeLay, who as the chief Republican vote-counter brings the power of his vaunted House whip operation as well as his own widely acclaimed -- and feared -- brass-knuckle tactics that have earned him the nickname ''The Hammer.'' (''If we get within four or five votes, we can break some arms on the floor,'' said one of Mr. DeLay's advisers.)Mr. DeLay insists that his personal distaste for Mr. Clinton, whom he criticized recently as ''lacking the necessary moral authority to protect U.S. interests in the world,'' is not clouding his professional task at hand: rounding up votes.''I have a fundamental disagreement with this president about how he's done his job, but when he's doing something I think is important I'm going to support him because he doesn't do it very often,'' Mr. DeLay said in a telephone interview.Mr. DeLay has even gone out of his way to praise the president's efforts to rally support for the measure. Mr. DeLay's chief of staff, Susan B. Hirschmann, consults regularly with the chief White House lobbyist, Charles M. Brain.''They've done a good job, and the president's done a very good job,'' Mr. DeLay said. ''He's done exactly what a president should do in getting his points across.''Administration officials say they are pleased, and relieved, that the bitter rivalry has turned to temporary truce. ''Even though it may seem a little strange, based on other battles we've had, there have been a few flurries of bipartisanship in seven years,'' Commerce Secretary William Daley said today.The Clinton-DeLay connection is just one of the odd alignments spawned from the fight, which has labor unions and conservative religious groups opposing the measure and soybean farmers and high-tech executives backing it.Support for the measure grew today. The Federal Reserve chairman, Alan Greenspan, publicly endorsed it. Three former presidents, Gerald R. Ford, Jimmy Carter and George Bush, issued a letter coordinated by the White House warning that defeat ''would be read in China as a vote for confrontation and as an argument for hunkering down, instead of continuing to reach out.''Mr. Bush's son, Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, the presumptive Republican presidential nominee, also supports the measure, but according to aides has not discussed it with Mr. DeLay. So does Vice President Al Gore, although he gave somewhat mixed signals earlier in the year.Some colleagues say Mr. DeLay is singing the White House's praises through clenched teeth, and is consoling himself that helping to hand Mr. Clinton a crowning legislative triumph will cheer the pro-Republican business community and undermine the Chinese Communists.If it is strange to see Mr. DeLay and Mr. Clinton teaming up, it is equally strange for Mr. Delay to support a measure that China passionately wants. Mr. DeLay, a fierce anti-Communist, is the chief author of the proposed Taiwan Security Enhancement Act, a bill the House passed this year to strengthen military ties between Taiwan and the Pentagon, which Beijing strongly opposes.Then there was Mr. DeLay's encounter last spring with China's ambassador, Li Zhao Xing, offstage at the NBC News program ''Meet the Press.''''I told him: 'Don't take the weakness of this American president as the weakness of the American people,' '' Mr. DeLay recounted recently to a group of Washington Post reporters and editors. ''He looked at me kind of funny, so I pulled him real close, nose to nose, and I repeated it, very slowly. He just turned and kind of walked off.''Outside the studio, Mr. DeLay said the ambassador stopped criticizing the United States and ''scooted off'' when the lawmaker walked up. ''It shows you that if you stand up to a bully, then you control the bully,'' Mr. DeLay said. ''If you kowtow to the bully, the bully will run your life forever. And that's the way I see these people.''A Chinese Embassy official said the ambassador had no idea who Mr. DeLay was, and until he read about the incident, thought he had been accosted by an ordinary American.  The two men met later to discuss the trade bill, and there were ''no hard feelings,'' the embassy aide said.So why does so fierce a critic of Beijing support the trade measure?  ''Exporting American values undermines the Communist regime in China,'' Mr. DeLay explained in the interview. ''I see it as a beginning of the end of Communism.''Mr. DeLay said he also distinguishes the Beijing government from ordinary Chinese people. ''They have tasted the sweet taste of freedom and they're not going to give it back,'' Mr. DeLay said in a speech last week.But corporate lobbyists have always viewed Mr. DeLay's commitment to trade with China with some suspicion. In a speech on March 16, Mr. DeLay underscored his support for normalizing trade relations with China, but he also warned that the status might be revoked if trade ever strengthened the Beijing government rather than weakened it.''We should never be fooled into cheering higher profits while Communist China harnesses that prosperity to construct an arsenal of tyranny,'' Mr. DeLay said.Which is why many business lobbyists who have met Mr. DeLay recently have been struck by his fervor. ''This man sounded like a true believer,'' said one leading lobbyist.  ''He talked about kicking butt.''
INTERNATIONALA3-15U.S. and Britain Agree To Aid U.N. in Sierra Leone  The United States and Britain will help bail out a United Nations peacekeeping mission in Sierra Leone that appears to be overwhelmed, with rebels killing civilians in the capital, Freetown, and holding more than 500 peacekeepers hostage. Britain will send about 700 troops to secure the airport, so that Europeans can leave. The Clinton administration agreed to provide transport planes.A1INTERNATIONALA3-15U.S. and Britain Agree To Aid U.N. in Sierra Leone  The United States and Britain will help bail out a United Nations peacekeeping mission in Sierra Leone that appears to be overwhelmed, with rebels killing civilians in the capital, Freetown, and holding more than 500 peacekeepers hostage. Britain will send about 700 troops to secure the airport, so that Europeans can leave. The Clinton administration agreed to provide transport planes.A1At least four people were killed when rebel groups clashed outside the home of the main rebel leader, Foday Sankoh, and thousands of protesters marched on his compound.A6Pulling Back in Congo  Uganda and Rwanda agreed to pull their troops from Kisangani, Congo's third largest city, and to let United Nations forces control the area.A7Sri Lanka Rebels Reject Deal  The government rejected an offer from Tamil rebels of a cease-fire in exchange for the government's promise to withdraw thousands of troops from a peninsula.A15Speeding Lebanon Pullout Plan  Israel, after a spate of border violence last week, is speeding up preparations to withdraw troops from southern Lebanon in case Prime Minister Ehud Barak decides to do so before his deadline of July 7.A11U.S. Aid Effort Criticized  An internal State Department report says the Clinton administration has done a poor job of delivering emergency aid to the people who need it. It says the officials responsible for relieving human suffering in foreign crises have little influence over high-level decision-making, and in some cases are shut out.A8Kosovo Albanian Is Killed  A well-known commander of the disbanded Kosovo Liberation Army, Ekrem Rexha, was shot dead outside his home in Prizren.A3Book Protest in Cairo  The police fired rubber bullets and tear gas at a demonstration by up to 2,000 students Al Azhar University who were protesting a novel, ''Banquet of Seaweed,'' which they said insults Islam.A5Germany Honors Soldier  Germany renamed a base in Rendsburg after a soldier in Hitler's army who disobeyed orders, saved hundreds of Jews and was executed by the Nazis for his acts.A3World BriefingA10NATIONALA16-23Clinton Plan for Forests Would Limit Road Building  A draft proposal by the Clinton administration to safeguard national forests from development would bar road building across nearly one-quarter of those lands but would not immediately rule out future logging or off-road vehicle activity. People active on both sides of the issue said they hoped it would be revised.A16Los Angeles Police Inquiry  Police and city officials agreed with the nation's top civil rights enforcement officer, Bill Lann Lee, the acting assistant attorney general for civil rights, to begin negotiations about long-sought changes in police training and procedures in an effort to avert a federal lawsuit.A16Gore Pushes China Trade Bill  Vice President Al Gore spoke more forcefully that he customarily has for permanent normalized trade relations for China, which Congress is to vote on this month. Mr. Gore has been tepid in backing the agreement, largely because organized labor, which backs him, opposes it.A23G.O.P. Primary Rivals to Meet  Gov. George W. Bush and Senator John McCain, left, are to meet in Pittsburgh today, their first face-to-face encounter since Mr. Bush's victories in the Super Tuesday primaries.A22Clinton's Side in License Case  President Clinton told a disciplinary panel of the Arkansas Supreme Court that despite a federal judge's finding that he was in contempt of court in the Monica Lewinsky case, he had not technically lied before the judge, and he urged the panel not to take away his law license, according to papers filed by opponents. He also cited his years of public service in arguing that no penalty harsher than a reprimand should be imposed.A19Outlawing Bias Based on Size  The San Francisco Board of Supervisors passed an ordinance that makes it illegal to discriminate against people based on their size, by adding height and weight to the same antidiscrimination codes that provide protections for people based on race, religion, color, ancestry, age, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity, disability and place of birth.A20Controlled Fire Is Not  A fire set by the National Park Service to clear an overgrown area in New Mexico has blown out of control, forcing the evacuation of thousands of people and threatening the Los Alamos National Laboratory.A16NEW YORK/REGIONB1-15Cardinal Is Laid to Rest After Solemn Ritual  Cardinal John O'Connor was entombed beneath the altar of St. Patrick's after a televised funeral Mass that was attended by 3,500 people.A1Parental Anger at Arrests  The police arrested about a third of 1,000 demonstrators pressing for legalization of marijuana on Saturday, and some of the protesters' parents expressed anger at the length and conditions of the detentions.B1Backing for Rises in Rent  The city's Rent Guidelines Board gave preliminary approval to raising one-year leases by 4 percent and two-year leases by 6 percent for rent-stabilized apartments.B3Gas Detector Was Inoperative  The police in Nassau County, on Long Island, said a doctor who came home to find six relatives and friends dead of carbon monoxide poisoning recalled disconnecting a carbon monoxide detector last summer.B5SPORTSD1-8Devils Go to Eastern Finals  The Devils beat the Toronto Maple Leafs, 3-0, to win their second-round N.H.L. playoff series.D1ARTSE1-10The Art of Speculation  An item offered on eBay as a ''great big wild abstract art painting'' was bid up to $135,805 on speculation that it might be a 1952 work by Richard Diebenkorn, who died in 1993.A1Tony Award Nominations  ''Kiss Me, Kate'' led with 12, including best musical revival.E1FASHIONB16SCIENCE TIMESF1-12Tracing the Jewish Diaspora  Biologists using a new technique based on the male chromosome traced the diaspora of Jewish populations from the dispersals that began in 586 B.C. to modern communities in Europe and the Mideast.F4New Light on Down Syndrome  Scientists have essentially completed the DNA sequence of chromosome 21, a result that sheds light on the workings of Down syndrome.F4Health & FitnessF7BUSINESS DAYC1-30Suspects in Virus Attack  Philippine officials, accompanied by F.B.I. agents, raided an apartment in Manila that they suspect was the launching pad for a malicious computer program that disrupted computer systems around the world last week. A man was taken into custody; his roommate, a woman whom officials spoke with by phone, agreed to turn herself in. Officials said there might be more suspects.A1Ad Agency Acquisition  Young & Rubicam ended 77 years of independence by agreeing to a $5.7 billion takeover by the WPP Group, a rival based in London. It is the largest deal in industry history.C13Com to Distribute Palm Stock  3Com said it would distribute its shares of Palm to its own shareholders in late July, setting the stage for the closing of the stock price gap that has existed ever since Palm went public in early March. Since then, Palm has traded at prices that appeared to be unreasonably high relative to the price of 3Com shares.C1Technology Shares Suffer  The Nasdaq dropped 147.44 points, or 3.9 percent, to 3,669.38, pulled down by Cisco, after an article in Barron's questioned its market capitalization. The Dow rose 25.77 points, to 10,603.63, but the S.& P. 500 dropped 8.46 points, to 1,424.17.C14Business DigestC1OBITUARIESB12EDITORIALA24-25Editorials: President Vladimir Putin; New York's message on clean air; watery grave for a Roman ruin.  Columns: Thomas L. Friedman, Gail Collins.CrosswordE4  TV ListingsE10  Public LivesB2  WeatherD8
For the political leaders crowded into the pews at the front of St. Patrick's Cathedral yesterday, from Democrats like President Clinton to Republicans like Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani, it was a difficult moment.At the pulpit, Cardinal Bernard Law delivered a homily for Cardinal John O'Connor that included a sharp reminder of one issue on which the cardinal famously sparred with national and New York government leaders. ''What a great legacy he has left us in his constant reminder that the church must always be unambiguously pro-life,'' Cardinal Law declared.For the political leaders crowded into the pews at the front of St. Patrick's Cathedral yesterday, from Democrats like President Clinton to Republicans like Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani, it was a difficult moment.At the pulpit, Cardinal Bernard Law delivered a homily for Cardinal John O'Connor that included a sharp reminder of one issue on which the cardinal famously sparred with national and New York government leaders. ''What a great legacy he has left us in his constant reminder that the church must always be unambiguously pro-life,'' Cardinal Law declared.There was a moment's pause. And then, rising from the pews, came an unbroken roar of applause that lasted for one minute and 50 seconds. Most of the political leaders at the front, almost all of them supporters of legalized abortion, rustled in obvious discomfort as television cameras focused on the moment.The mourners applauded as Cardinal Law tried to quiet them with a gesture of his hands. Then they rose to their feet. And with the audience rose the politicians, if not quite as quickly: Gov. George E. Pataki, Mr. Giuliani, Mr. Clinton, Hillary Rodham Clinton, Vice President Al Gore, Senator Charles E. Schumer and Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan among them. Mr. Giuliani, after tugging at his jacket, even joined in the applause, though unenergetically.In politics, the phrase ''pro-life'' is shorthand for opposition to abortion.But as Cardinal Law described it, Cardinal O'Connor meant the ''defense of life'' to include much more: opposing capital punishment, euthanasia and physician-assisted suicide, and defending the rights of workers and ''a just peace in the Middle East and in Northern Ireland.''But here the political meaning of pro-life seemed to overwhelm the church one.Gov. George W. Bush and his father, the former president, applauded. They were among the few politicians in the front pews who share the church's view on abortion. But they vigorously support the death penalty and are not particularly friendly to organized labor, as Cardinal O'Connor was.As the applause went on, Mr. Clinton could be seen whispering to Mrs. Clinton, who has moved to New York and is running for the Senate against Mr. Giuliani. They stood in what aides later described as a gesture of respect to the church and the cardinal, though they did not applaud.Mr. Giuliani's spokeswoman, Sunny Mindel, said the mayor applauded for the same reason. ''This was done out of a show of respect for the cardinal,'' Ms. Mindel said. ''As is known, the mayor is pro-choice.'' Mr. Pataki, who also favors abortion rights, applauded too, ''out of respect for the cardinal and the principles of the Catholic Church,'' said his senior adviser, Zenia Mucha.Cardinal Law seemed startled by the display caused by his remark about Cardinal O'Connor's teachings. ''I see he hasn't left the pulpit,'' Cardinal Law said.'DEATH OF A CARDINAL: THE POLITICS
Cardinal John Joseph O'Connor, the eighth archbishop of New York, whose wit and uncompromising eloquence made him the most visible spiritual leader of Roman Catholics across the United States, was entombed beneath the altar of St. Patrick's Cathedral yesterday in an ethereal ceremony of white-robed clerics and haunting song.Reflecting the stature that Cardinal O'Connor had achieved during his 16 years running the Archdiocese of New York, political and religious leaders from around the country joined New Yorkers to honor a man whose insistence on church teachings had defied the secular labels of liberal and conservative politics.Cardinal John Joseph O'Connor, the eighth archbishop of New York, whose wit and uncompromising eloquence made him the most visible spiritual leader of Roman Catholics across the United States, was entombed beneath the altar of St. Patrick's Cathedral yesterday in an ethereal ceremony of white-robed clerics and haunting song.Reflecting the stature that Cardinal O'Connor had achieved during his 16 years running the Archdiocese of New York, political and religious leaders from around the country joined New Yorkers to honor a man whose insistence on church teachings had defied the secular labels of liberal and conservative politics.Led by acolytes bearing incense and holding high the archbishopric cross, with its distinctive double crossbeams, a procession of more than 2,000 deacons, priests, bishops, nuns and cardinals marched down the central aisle of the cathedral at 1:30 p.m., passing alongside the cardinal's mahogany coffin, which was draped in a white linen pall. As they passed, they rested their hands on the coffin briefly, before moving on.''He made this pulpit unique in the history of the Catholic Church in the United States,'' said Cardinal Bernard Law of Boston in a homily that was interrupted by a standing ovation of nearly two minutes after he invoked Cardinal O'Connor's ''constant reminder that the church must always be unambiguously pro-life.''Surveying the congregation, now on its feet, Cardinal Law added, ''I see he hasn't left the pulpit.''''God gifted him with a keen and subtle intellect, an uncommon rhetorical skill, a knack for the dramatic gesture, a sharp wit and an outrageous sense of humor, all of which he used in the service of preaching,'' said Cardinal Law, who was near Cardinal O'Connor when he died last Wednesday night at the age of 80, after a protracted battle with cancer that began late last summer with surgery to remove a brain tumor.Among the dignitaries attending the invitation-only funeral were President Clinton and Hillary Rodham Clinton, who sat beside Vice President Al Gore and his wife, Tipper Gore. Behind the President sat Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani, the first lady's rival for the United States Senate seat being vacated by Daniel Patrick Moynihan, who was also present. Mrs. Clinton shook hands with Mayor Giuliani during the ''kiss of peace'' that is part of the Catholic Mass. On the other side of the coffin, alongside Cardinal O'Connor's family, sat former President George Bush, who was a friend of the cardinal's. Elsewhere in the audience sat Mr. Bush's son, George W. Bush, with his wife, Laura.About 15 cardinals, the highest-ranking clerics in the Roman Catholic Church after the pope, also turned out to usher Cardinal O'Connor to his final resting place, as did an equal number of archbishops and 300 bishops. One of them, seated prominently in the sanctuary, was the man expected to succeed Cardinal O'Connor, Bishop Edward M. Egan of Bridgeport, Conn.Also attending were all of the others whose names have figured prominently in speculation about a successor: Archbishops Theodore E. McCarrick of Newark, Justin F. Rigali of St. Louis and Edwin F. O'Brien of the military archdiocese, along with Bishops Henry Mansell of Buffalo, Sean O'Malley of Fall River, Mass., and Donald Wuerl of Pittsburgh.Though few nuns attended, other than mothers superior, two orders held prominent places. One was Mother Teresa's Missionaries of Charity. The other was the Sisters of Life, a New York-based order founded by Cardinal O'Connor, whose 30 members devote themselves to protecting the sanctity of life, whether by running shelters for unwed mothers or by ministering to the sick and elderly.More than 3,500 mourners filled the cathedral, whose walls echoed with the hymns and speeches celebrating the eternal life on whose threshold the faithful believe Cardinal O'Connor now stands. Much of the service, which ran nearly three hours from the procession that opened it to the one that ended it,  reflected choices the cardinal had made as he prepared for his death -- from the selection of Cardinal Law to  deliver the homily, to the abundance and choice of music.The diocesan priests and bishops wore white, in keeping with their belief that death is not the end of life, but a time of rebirth. In contrast with Masses held in the first days after Cardinal O'Connor's death, few in the pews wept.Outside the cathedral, hundreds  stood in wilting temperatures that reached the 90's, in rows 8 to 10 people deep, to hear the service, which was broadcast over loudspeakers. Twenty-five Red Cross workers handed out lemonade and water. Police officers sweltered in their formal uniforms: long-sleeved shirts, ties and woolen jackets.Strictly speaking, John O'Connor was the direct spiritual leader only of the 2.4 million Catholics of his own archdiocese, which covered Manhattan, the Bronx and Staten Island, along with seven counties north of the city. But his influence extended to millions more Catholics throughout the New York region, and perhaps the country, who traveled from all parts of the region and nation to pay their respects yesterday.Jerry Kennedy, a banking consultant from Old Bridge, N.J., had come with his four brothers to watch the spectacle outside the cathedral. ''I used to wave to the cardinal every St. Patrick's Day, and he would wave back,'' Mr. Kennedy said. ''This is my final wave.''From Rome came Cardinal Angelo Sodano, the Vatican's secretary of state, who led the Mass of Christian Burial. ''Lord, we do not complain that you have taken him from us,'' he prayed. ''Rather we will thank you for giving him to us.''Cardinal O'Connor's stands on political issues sprang from his faith in the Gospel, making it difficult to brand him conservative or liberal.  From the start of his tenure in 1984, he acquired a reputation as a conservative, preaching strict adherence to traditional Church doctrines abjuring homosexuality, abortion and contraception. And he assailed Catholic politicians, like Gov. Mario M. Cuomo and Geraldine A. Ferraro, who he felt strayed from those views.But in later years, the cardinal's  image as a conservative blurred as he he spoke out for the rights of workers and the dispossessed, and opposed capital punishment and euthanasia. Nevertheless, it was the cardinal's untiring efforts to outlaw abortion that perhaps drew the greatest attention to him, and that yesterday sparked an unscripted show of devotion: a sustained, standing ovation, which began when one of the Sisters of Life rose to her feet.Bishop Robert A. Brucato, one of Cardinal O'Connor's two vicars general, his top lieutenants, said it was  the cardinal's unabashed use of the media -- in the media capital of the world -- to assert church doctrine, whether in the secular or religious arena, that distinguished him. Bishop Brucato made a point of welcoming the millions of Catholics watching the funeral on television.In a brief talk about Cardinal O'Connor, Cardinal William Baum, head of penitential services like confessions and indulgences in the Vatican, noted that Cardinal O'Connor's patron saint was St. John Fisher, who was beheaded for treason in 1535 by King Henry VIII of England after refusing to renounce the Catholic Church.''Cardinal O'Connor wasn't decapitated,'' Cardinal Baum said. ''He didn't die for his faith, but he did proclaim it, and he suffered.'' Cardinal Baum recalled that Cardinal O'Connor had asked Catholics to pray for his soul after his death.At 3:35, after many in the cathedral, including Mayor Giuliani, had lined the aisles to receive holy communion, Cardinal Sodano sprinkled  Cardinal O'Connor's coffin with holy water, as a thurifer waved incense that rose toward the cathedral's vaulted ceilings. There hung the traditional red hats, or galleros, of the  New York archbishops before Cardinal Francis Spellman, who was installed in 1939.In solemn procession, Cardinal Sodano led the coffin up the center aisle and down the side, as the choir and the congregants sang ''May the Angels Take You Into Paradise.'' Behind him walked other cardinals and a few members of Cardinal O'Connor's family, including his two sisters, Mary Ward and Dorothy Hamilton, and his brother Thomas.A smaller group, consisting only of Cardinal Sodano, a few other church officials and Cardinal O'Connor's family, entered the crypt to see the cardinal placed in his tomb, alongside the tombs of other prelates. With little space in the crypt, the other cardinals waited outside as Cardinal O'Connor's coffin was slipped in beside that of Archbishop John J. Maguire.In the sanctuary upstairs, the bishops stood through the half-hour entombent in silence, with their backs to the pews. Congregants, too, stood in silent farewell.On the stone that sealed the cardinal in his crypt is a simple inscription, bearing his name and age, and the years he served as archbishop of New York. Also carved in the stone is his coat of arms, emblazoned with the words Cardinal O'Connor chose to give meaning to his mission: ''There can be no love without justice.''DEATH OF A CARDINAL: THE OVERVIEW
The funeral fit the man. And of course the city, too. It was majestic, sacramental, solemn, prayerful.  That was uppermost. But it didn't lack a touch of the ticker-tape parade either, and more than a touch of in-your-face political controversy.Seldom has so much political, moral and cultural explosiveness been put into such proximity as in the first few pews of St. Patrick's Cathedral yesterday, where President Clinton and Hillary Rodham Clinton knelt with Vice President Al Gore; the Bush dynasty, father and son; Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani; Gov. George E. Pataki; Secretary General Kofi Annan of the United Nations; and Secretary of State Madeleine Albright.  There were two former mayors, Edward I. Koch and David N. Dinkins, and -- well, the idea is clear. Draw all the lines of alliance, rivalry, anger and affection among those individuals and the results would be as messy as a child's scribble.The funeral fit the man. And of course the city, too. It was majestic, sacramental, solemn, prayerful.  That was uppermost. But it didn't lack a touch of the ticker-tape parade either, and more than a touch of in-your-face political controversy.Seldom has so much political, moral and cultural explosiveness been put into such proximity as in the first few pews of St. Patrick's Cathedral yesterday, where President Clinton and Hillary Rodham Clinton knelt with Vice President Al Gore; the Bush dynasty, father and son; Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani; Gov. George E. Pataki; Secretary General Kofi Annan of the United Nations; and Secretary of State Madeleine Albright.  There were two former mayors, Edward I. Koch and David N. Dinkins, and -- well, the idea is clear. Draw all the lines of alliance, rivalry, anger and affection among those individuals and the results would be as messy as a child's scribble.It was Cardinal John O'Connor, along with the importance of New York City, who brought all those leaders there. One suspects that he would have been delighted and his mischievous sense of humor set working overtime.If this was a national event for a national religious leader, it was also an international event for a major figure in an international church.  There were five Roman Catholic cardinals from overseas, as well as the two Americans, Cardinal William Baum and Cardinal Edmund Szoka, who work in Rome. No less than Cardinal Angelo Sodano, the Vatican secretary of state, celebrated the Mass. To go any higher it would have had to be the pope himself.And it was a personal event, reflecting Cardinal O'Connor himself.  There was his signature emphasis on what the church calls its defense of life, with opposition to abortion and euthanasia at its core, but fleshed out to include international peacemaking; the rights of workers, the poor and the sick; and the condemnation of capital punishment.In Cardinal O'Connor's style, Cardinal Bernard Law of Boston was utterly direct with this message -- no matter how uncomfortable he might be making a group of political leaders, virtually none of whom could qualify as ''unambiguously pro-life'' by the standards spelled out in the Boston prelate's homily.Very visible at the funeral and frequently mentioned was another of Cardinal O'Connor's typically personal initiatives, the founding of the Sisters of Life, an order of nuns who devote themselves to the cause largely through prayer but also through service to women in need.Despite the cardinal's request that the Mass not be a tribute to him, his profile and personality loomed so large as to put all else in the shadows; the other nuns and priests, the lay church workers and active parishioners, the vast New York Catholic Church of parishes and neighborhoods.When Cardinal Joseph Bernardin of Chicago died in November 1996, his funeral featured gospel music and songs in Polish and Spanish along with polyphony and Gregorian chant. It had brief prayers offered by lay people in many of the archdiocese's languages. The homily was delivered not by a high official but by a local priest who had been the cardinal's longtime aide.It was a simple fact of geography, not of anyone's planning, that Cardinal Bernardin was buried with his predecessors in a cemetery 15 miles from his cathedral. The cortege drove through the archdiocese's city streets, far from downtown and past churches and schools and saloons and used-car lots, too, and past clusters of construction workers doffing their hard hats, elderly folks braving the November drizzle and schoolchildren waving signs.Cardinal O'Connor, by contrast, was buried within his own cathedral, smack in the middle of Manhattan.  The journey was entirely within the cathedral and surrounded by men in vestments. It was a moving moment when the magnificent choir had completed its Latin chant of ''May the angels escort you into paradise,'' and the worshipers gave the cardinal a final volley of applause before the coffin was carried down to the crypt.Some who belong to the New York church of parish bazaars, religious education classes and Altar and Rosary Societies were pressing against the police barriers across Fifth Avenue, but most, one supposed, had to watch on television.Yet the funeral did not always seem to float above and beyond this New York church in a realm of Vatican influence, national politics and the New York leader's very special concerns. The service could come suddenly down to earth in the way that Cardinal O'Connor often did, the way so frequently mentioned during the last week, with personal attention to a specific individual.When, at the very end of the service, Cardinal William Baum thanked several people who had helped Cardinal O'Connor to the end, he did not stop with family and aides but went on to one of the most faithful but least known of the workers, Maura O'Kelly, who oversaw the cardinal's residence, as she had for his two predecessors. Cardinal O'Connor would have been delighted with that, too.DEATH OF A CARDINAL: THE CEREMONY
It may be hard to believe but American Ballet Theater is 60 years old, a milestone celebrated at the anniversary gala that opened the company's two-month season on Monday night. It was an event that married past and present and looked to the future. ''Variations on a Theme by Haydn,'' a subtle, formal and rich ballet that Twyla Tharp has set to music by Brahms, received its New York premiere.This look toward new creativity was balanced during the evening at the Metropolitan Opera House by excerpts from the repertory and some surprise guests, notably Alicia Alonso, the Cuban ballerina who was one of Ballet Theater's earliest stars in the 1940's.It may be hard to believe but American Ballet Theater is 60 years old, a milestone celebrated at the anniversary gala that opened the company's two-month season on Monday night. It was an event that married past and present and looked to the future. ''Variations on a Theme by Haydn,'' a subtle, formal and rich ballet that Twyla Tharp has set to music by Brahms, received its New York premiere.This look toward new creativity was balanced during the evening at the Metropolitan Opera House by excerpts from the repertory and some surprise guests, notably Alicia Alonso, the Cuban ballerina who was one of Ballet Theater's earliest stars in the 1940's.Tipper Gore, who was honorary chairman of the gala with Vice President Al Gore (not present), was introduced by Caroline Kennedy and Senator Charles Schumer of New York, who were introduced at the start by Hamilton James, chairman of the company's board.Like Ms. Kennedy, Senator Schumer urged strong support for the arts. Mrs. Gore offered her variation on the theme, broadening it into an appreciation of ''the arts as part of our national heritage.'' ''Swan Lake,'' in a new staging by Kevin McKenzie, the company's artistic director, was represented by an excerpt from Act II and started the dancing on the program.Company alumni made their appearance at the first intermission: Donald Saddler, Miriam Golden and Annabelle Lyon had all danced at Ballet Theater's debut in New York on Jan. 11, 1940, and took a bow. Mr. Saddler, a choreographer and director in ballet and on Broadway, paid tribute to Richard Pleasant, Ballet Theater's founding director, and to Lucia Chase, the company's founding patron and later co-director with Oliver Smith from 1945 to 1980.In her remarks, Ms. Alonso said, ''This was the first big classical company in the United States and it was wonderful, we were all together.'' Speaking of pioneering years for both the dancers and the audience, she concluded, ''The most beautiful way to unite people is through art.''Unity of a new sort was signaled when Mr. McKenzie stepped on stage at the end of the evening to read a message from Mikhail Baryshnikov, who withdrew all his productions from the company after he resigned as its artistic director in 1989. Mr. Baryshnikov, who has kept his distance from the troupe, sent his best wishes ''in honor of Lucia Chase and Oliver Smith.''In his own remarks, Mr. McKenzie said, ''Sixty is too young to be old and too old to be young.'' By past standards, it was a sober and simple gala, keeping reminiscences and alumni to the minimum. Nonetheless there was a festive close in a mass curtain call. Gold and silver balloons rained down on the entire company and on the guests, who included the British-born star Frederic Franklin.Ms. Tharp's ballet deserves special attention not only because of its novelty but also because the rest of the familiar program was unevenly danced. Terrific is the word for the men, who blended style, artistry and virtuosity. With a few exceptions the women were atypically off form.With 30 dancers, ''Variations on a Theme by Haydn'' is a big ballet despite its relative brevity. Ms. Tharp keeps to the classical vocabulary more than usual, with only a few quirky weight shifts playing off ballet's centered positions.Above all, she has added her own sophisticated dimension to the music, reflecting its emotional essence and classical form. This is a ballet that perpetually retracts and expands, swelling into an intense and frontal advance by the dancers that corresponds to Brahms's grand finale.The changing patterns reflect the musical theme's celebrated structure (AABB) and counterpoint, but there is too much going on at once to view the ballet as a literal visualization of the score.Ms. Tharp tends to sacrifice details to a larger pattern. But strict clarity is not the issue. The choreography makes each of the nine variations an adventure: Each is unpredictable, impelled by the energy that drives the entire ballet.It is a plotless work with dance as its subject and yet there are episodes that imply courtships and a chase scene. The big lifts are obvious, and  the counterpoint in the choreography is present in the contrasts among the five main couples and two pairs of soloists, not just in the interaction of the principals and the ensemble, often divided into units of four or eight pairs.Santo Loquasto's tunics and tights nonetheless color code the corps in light green and the principals in tan. Jennifer Tipton's lighting design is as fine as usual.Three couples stand out in the beginning, but it isn't long before Susan Jaffe and Marcelo Gomes stand out as more equal among equals. Julie Kent with Angel Corella and Paloma Herrera with Vladimir Malakhov introduce the athletic partnering, and Ms. Jaffe introduces the diamond motif in a lift that will recur. Irina Dvorovenko and Maxim Belotserkovsky stood out in brief, fast solos woven into the choreography's texture, and Sandra Brown and Herman Cornejo darted in and out.Oksana Konobeyeva and Gennadi Saveliev as well as Ekaterina Shelkanova with a brilliantly dancing Carlos Molina occupied the middle ground between the ensemble and the principals. But Mr. Corella and Ms. Kent had the stage alone for a playful courtship, full of slides and swoons. Ms. Jaffe and Mr. Gomes, whose duets had a flourish, led the finale, which somehow seemed disconnected from the orchestra.Ermanno Florio's conducting nonetheless could not be faulted during the evening. Mr. Corella and Ms. Kent flowed elegantly through part of Act II in ''Swan Lake.'' Mr. Malakhov and Amanda McKerrow seemed to be dancing ''Giselle'' instead of George Balanchine's ''Tchaikovsky Pas de Deux.'' Mr. Corella's bravura rightly wowed all in the ''Corsaire'' pas de deux with Ms. Jaffe, and Jose Manuel Carreno was equally magnificent in ''Diana and Acteon'' with Ms. Herrera.Ms. Kent and Julio Boca led the finale of ''Theme and Variations,'' and Mr. Boca and Alessandra Ferri acted their way lustily through the bedroom duet from Kenneth MacMillan's ''Manon.'' Nina Ananiashvili brought down the house with her arm-rippling and idiosyncratic ''Dying Swan.''BALLET REVIEW
To the Editor:It is hard to believe that Lynn Scarlett's supportive description of George W. Bush's environmental program in Texas (''Bush's Friendlier Path to Clean Air,'' Op-Ed, May 9) applies to the state where I live. What we have here is reckless industrial development, with virtually no concern for the environment.To the Editor:It is hard to believe that Lynn Scarlett's supportive description of George W. Bush's environmental program in Texas (''Bush's Friendlier Path to Clean Air,'' Op-Ed, May 9) applies to the state where I live. What we have here is reckless industrial development, with virtually no concern for the environment.Houston has surpassed Los Angeles as the most polluted city in the nation. Industry cooperation in reducing the poisoning of the chemical stew that passes for an atmosphere around Houston is a joke; industries moved there because there are few regulations (especially of state origin), and their powerful lobbyists have a firm grip on the governor to keep things that way.THOMAS J. CROWLEY  College Station, Tex., May 9, 2000The writer is a professor of oceanography at Texas A&M University.
Following are excerpts from a news conference yesterday by Gov. George W. Bush and Senator John McCain, announcing Mr. McCain's endorsement of Mr. Bush for president, as recorded by The New York Times.Q. -- Senator, why do you have difficulty using the word ''endorsement'' in your support for Governor Bush?Following are excerpts from a news conference yesterday by Gov. George W. Bush and Senator John McCain, announcing Mr. McCain's endorsement of Mr. Bush for president, as recorded by The New York Times.Q. -- Senator, why do you have difficulty using the word ''endorsement'' in your support for Governor Bush?MR. McCAIN. -- I endorse Governor Bush. I endorse -- I endorse Governor Bush. I endorse Governor Bush. I endorse Governor Bush. I endorse Governor Bush. I endorse Governor Bush. I endorse Governor ----MR. BUSH. -- By the way, I enthusiastically accept.Q. -- Does that have to do with the feelings you still have about the primary that you ran and the bitterness you had at the time about some of the tactics that Governor Bush used?MR. McCAIN. -- Look, the only way you can approach American politics and seeking elective office is to move forward. For me to look back in anger or with any rancor would be a mistake. It would harm me; it would harm Governor Bush, and it would harm those who supported me in this campaign. I look forward and not back. I hold no rancor. Others will be the judge of this campaign, not me.And my job is to further our efforts to bring about institutions -- reforming the institutions of government. I can't do that effectively if I look back rather than forward. . . .Q. -- How important is that endorsement to you, A? And B, what do you say to that block out there, 23 percent, according to a recent poll, on this day that he's endorsing you?MR. BUSH. -- Well, I think this endorsement's important because of that reason.There's a lot of people who think John is not only a great American, but a person who's got a good solid agenda for the future. And as we just said, there's a lot of areas where we agree. And I intend to continue talking about reform and I'm -- and it's very helpful to have John embrace reform.Now, I'll tell you a good area where we both agree and there was going to be a stark difference of opinion, and that's on Social Security.There's a lot of Americans who understand it's time to have a different attitude when it comes to making sure there's pension plans available for younger workers. John and I both agree we must trust younger workers with some of their money in the private sector. We both agree. . . .And it's going to be a big difference of opinion between what he and I believe and what Vice President Gore believes. Vice President Gore's willing to accept the status quo. He's willing to think the current system is going to work. And we don't. . . .Q. -- Senator, can you tell us what, in your view, is the single most important reason why Al Gore should not be president?MR. McCAIN. -- I think the single most important reason is that Governor Bush is the most qualified person to be president of the United States. He has the vision; he has the knowledge and the expertise to carry out the mission of maintaining United States supremacy, both militarily and economically in the world.I think that it's clear that Governor Bush's philosophy, his ideals and his ability to articulate a vision for the future is the major reason why he should be president of the United States and not Al Gore.And I want to emphasize one more time, and I made it very clear to Governor Bush, I will continue to pursue the issues of reform. That is the agenda that drove me in my campaign and will drive me as long as I am in public service. I believe we will have disagreements, but I also believe we will have a lot more agreements than disagreements. And I think our discussions and our debate will be healthy, and in the long run helpful to the party and the country.THE 2000 CAMPAIGN
Two former presidents and an array of senior officials from Democratic and Republican administrations rallied today with President Clinton and Vice President Al Gore at the White House to urge Congress to approve a landmark China trade bill.Speaking at a ceremony in the ornate East Room, Mr. Clinton intensified his lobbying in advance of the House vote, now likely on May 24 or May 25, to grant China permanent normal trading privileges.Two former presidents and an array of senior officials from Democratic and Republican administrations rallied today with President Clinton and Vice President Al Gore at the White House to urge Congress to approve a landmark China trade bill.Speaking at a ceremony in the ornate East Room, Mr. Clinton intensified his lobbying in advance of the House vote, now likely on May 24 or May 25, to grant China permanent normal trading privileges.''If the Congress votes against it, they'll be kicking themselves in the rear 10 years from now, because America will be paying the price,'' Mr. Clinton told scores of invited dignitaries.Statesmen, scholars and military chiefs, including former Secretaries of State Henry A. Kissinger and James A. Baker 3d, whose public service spanned nearly 50 years in some cases, stood with Mr. Clinton in warning of the consequences of defeat.''A negative vote in the House or Senate would be catastrophic to American agriculture, electronics, telecommunications, autos and countless other products and services,'' said former President Gerald R. Ford.Critics of the measure, which would allow American companies to benefit fully from a market-opening agreement that would pave the way for China to enter the World Trade Organization, say it would sacrifice lawmakers' influence over Beijing's record on human rights and religious freedoms.Former President Jimmy Carter acknowledged that China had fallen short in those areas, but cautioned against rejecting the measure. ''There's no doubt in my mind,'' Mr. Carter said, ''that a negative vote on this issue in the Congress will be a serious setback and impediment for the further democratization, freedom and human rights in China.''Sandwiched between Mr. Clinton and the former presidents in turns at the microphone, Mr. Gore, the presumptive Democratic presidential nominee, appeared reluctant to give his full-throated endorsement. His words sounded like support. But his subdued tone suggested the pains that Mr. Gore has taken to avoid alienating a pivotal ally, organized labor, which opposes the accord.''It is right for American jobs, it is right for the cause of reform in China, and I believe it will move us closer to the strong and stable world community that we all seek to create,'' Mr. Gore said.With just two weeks left before the  vote, the White House and its allies on Capitol Hill say they are still 10 to 15 votes shy of the 218 needed for passage. About 30 Democrats and roughly as many Republicans remained officially undecided, and the presentation today was aimed at pulling both camps down off the fence.Mr. Clinton said opponents -- an unlikely coalition of liberal Democrats and conservative Republicans -- were unwittingly doing the bidding of the measure's foes in China, the owners of state-owned enterprises and reactionary military leaders.''It is truly ironic when you look at who's against this in China to see that some of the most progressive people in the United States are basically doing what they want them to do in opposing this agreement,'' said Mr. Clinton, who may visit a Democrat's district in Minnesota or Ohio on Friday to champion the proposed lower tariffs for American farmers.In their own news conferences, opponents warned that normalizing trade relations would only reward China's bellicose government. ''Regardless of the administration's trade objectives, the reality is that China prepares for war,'' said Representative Duncan Hunter, a California Republican.In a bid to sway uncommitted lawmakers, Representatives Sander M. Levin, Democrat of Michigan, and Doug Bereuter, Republican of Nebraska, announced a bipartisan plan to create a commission to monitor Chinese human rights and require protection against a surge in Chinese imports.One undecided Republican, Phil English of Pennsylvania, said, ''This will make my decision a lot easier.'' But Representative Dick Armey of Texas, the majority leader, said provisions on labor and imports would cost Republican votes on the floor.But without some sort of bill to address labor and human rights issues, Representative Robert T. Matsui of California, a top Democratic vote counter, said, ''this will be a real problem for us.''
One of Russia's leading missile scientists, Yuri P. Savelyev, was always more than willing to teach advanced rocket-building to Iranian engineers, who are said to be working on missiles that could reach most Middle Eastern capitals, and even Alaska.When Russian government officials tried to stop him four years ago because Russia had signed an international agreement to control the spread of ballistic missile technology, Mr. Savelyev persisted.One of Russia's leading missile scientists, Yuri P. Savelyev, was always more than willing to teach advanced rocket-building to Iranian engineers, who are said to be working on missiles that could reach most Middle Eastern capitals, and even Alaska.When Russian government officials tried to stop him four years ago because Russia had signed an international agreement to control the spread of ballistic missile technology, Mr. Savelyev persisted.As the rector of the famous Baltic State Technical University, he developed a program to teach students from a leading Iranian university courses in advanced physics, metallurgy and the behavior of gases and fluids under high pressure and temperature -- all disciplines essential to building rockets.That was done, he said, with the full knowledge of the Russian Defense Ministry and the national intelligence agency, known as the Federal Security Service, of which Mr. Savelyev's deputy is a member.Then last February, after complaints from the Clinton administration, Mr. Savelyev was ordered to shut down the program. He was summoned to Moscow by the Ministry of Education, where he was reprimanded and threatened with dismissal for concealing the educational program that was under way both here and in Iran.''I really have big problems,'' he said, seated near a display cabinet where he keeps a portrait of Iran's late spiritual leader, Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini. ''I now have as my antagonists the Russian government and the American government and I think one way or the other, they will find a way to fire me from the post of rector.''As concerns mount in the United States and Israel that Iran's secretive missile and nuclear weapons programs could pose new threats in the region, the case of Mr. Savelyev illustrates the behind-the-scenes cooperation between the Russian and American governments to stem the flow of missile technologies to Iran. But at the same time, it also reveals the deep-seated resistance within the Russian military and security establishment against abandoning Russia's ''strategic'' role in cultivating clients and lucrative contracts for transferring military science and technology.''I would tell you honestly that I wanted to work with them,'' Mr. Savelyev said of his Iranian contacts, ''and I would be teaching Iranians rocket technology today if I could because otherwise I would have my professors going to the market to sell fruits and vegetables to earn a living.''In a lengthy interview, Mr. Savelyev defended his activities, saying he was unfairly disciplined because of his hard-line nationalistic views and because he has become a vocal critic of President Vladimir V. Putin's cooperation with the United States on arms control initiatives. Mr. Savelyev contends that such cooperation will weaken Russia's own rocket forces and will alienate Iran.''I believe there is nothing more important than having Iran as our ally,'' he said, ''because if we fell into a state of animosity with Iran, the whole of Central Asia could be lost to the influence of the Islamic world.'' He also argues that if Russia does not help Iran build medium range ballistic missiles, ''North Korea and China are ready to offer Iran help with new rocket programs.''Last month in Washington, the State Department spokesman, James P. Rubin, singled out Mr. Savelyev as a threat to United States security interests. In announcing that the United States was lifting sanctions on several Russian organizations suspected of providing assistance to Iran's ballistic missile program, including Baltic State, Mr. Rubin said a ban on all contact or educational exchanges with Mr. Savelyev ''personally'' would remain in force.''The rector is believed to have violated Russian export controls and attempted to export goods or services that could contribute to missiles capable of delivering weapons of mass destruction,'' Mr. Rubin said.Mr. Savelyev denied that characterization, saying he never transferred more than a good education in basic science. ''Can Newton's law of gravity be taught to Iranian students?'' he asked with a defiant tone. ''Because if you don't know the laws of gravity, you cannot build rockets.''Today, Mr. Savelyev, 62, is still rector at Baltic State, one of Russia's most prestigious scientific centers. ''I have been a rocket builder all my life,'' he said, ''and many of the leading Russian rocket builders have graduated from this university,'' whose laboratories were shrouded in secrecy until 1991 and, even today, remain off limits to foreigners.One of the most famous graduates of Baltic State was the late Vladimir F. Utkin, who designed Russia's most fearsome land-based strategic rocket, the SS-18 ''Satan,'' whose payload of 10 independently targetable warheads spawned fears in the West that Moscow would mount a pre-emptive nuclear strike to wipe out American missile fields and then try to force an American surrender or ride out a nuclear war.Mr. Savelyev's relationship with Iran began in mid-1996, when he received a telephone call from an Iranian diplomat in Moscow to discuss an educational proposal. ''I can say that at that time, they were more concerned with preparing specialists in rocket construction'' than any general education, he said.Days later Mr. Savelyev greeted an Iranian delegation here that included two rocket experts from Iran's Ministry of Defense, as well as an Iranian intelligence officer.The meeting resulted in a handwritten agreement to train Iranian scientists in rocketry, but when Mr. Savelyev forwarded the document to the Education Ministry in Moscow, the program was rejected because only a year before Russia had signed the Missile Technology Control Regime, an agreement by more than two dozen nations to control the spread of missile technology.''Nevertheless, the Iranians still wanted to have their students study here,'' he said. And by the fall of 1996, Mr. Savelyev said, ''we welcomed 26 Iranian students'' to study for undergraduate degrees in mechanical engineering and general science courses.In early 1997, Israeli officials warned the Clinton administration that a number of Russian organizations were assisting Iran's missile program and American intelligence agencies confirmed that as many as 20 such firms and institutes, including Baltic State, were involved.Mr. Savelyev denies the charge, but adds that he believes that the original handwritten agreement he signed with Iran in 1996, though never carried out, fell into the hands of Western intelligence.Shortly after the initial group of Iranian students graduated from Baltic State in April 1998, new concerns arose in the United States. A special panel headed by a former defense secretary, Donald H. Rumsfeld, estimated that Iran's missile program had made significant strides and might be able to develop an ICBM capable of reaching the United States. Then, in late July of that year, Iran created a sensation in the Middle East by test-firing a medium range ballistic missile prototype, the Shahab-3, that can carry a 1,500 pound warhead 800 miles.Russia, under pressure from the United States, announced that it was investigating Baltic State and eight other organizations for exporting technologies that could have military uses. Throughout the spring of 1998, Mr. Savelyev said, Baltic State's undergraduate program for Iranian students was thoroughly investigated by a government commission.''They reached the conclusion that Baltic State was not teaching anything related to rocket construction,'' Mr. Savelyev said. But he was told that if he wanted to continue teaching Iranian students he would have to draw up a detailed course list and submit it to Moscow for approval.That summer, he and his staff drew up a course list of 111 specialized subjects that Baltic State wanted to offer to foreign students as a means to earn income for the university. Each course outline ran more than 40 pages, and the government commission spent nine months reviewing it before approving all but 12 subjects, Mr. Savelyev said. Among the rejected courses were the study of ''fuse technology,'' the design of ''antitank rockets'' and ''ignition and explosives.''Armed with this approval, Mr. Savelyev sent out advertisements to universities in Iran, China, Syria, India and Vietnam offering to train graduate students in advanced sciences of metallurgy, gas and fluid dynamics in conditions of high-temperature and pressure and other disciplines that could be considered the basics of rocket science.Three Iranian universities responded, but Mr. Savelyev said two of them were on a secret list of 305 organizations in Iran with which Russian universities are forbidden to have contact. ''The government sent this list to our university, but I had the feeling that this list was prepared by the C.I.A.,'' he said.What was not on the list was K. N. Toosi University of Technology in Tehran, Iran, whose dean, S. N. Mousavi, was anxious to have his graduate students in mechanical engineering study under Russian professors.Without informing the Russian government, Mr. Savelyev flew to Tehran in September 1999 and signed an agreement with Mr. Mousavi to begin training the first 17 Iranian students immediately. Throughout last fall and up until February of this year, about two dozen Russian professors shuttled to Iran to teach courses in three-week segments, for which they were paid $1,000 each trip.But a month into the program, the United States again intervened.In an October 1999 letter from Vice President Al Gore to Mr. Putin, who was then the prime minister, the Clinton administration complained that Russia was failing to take action against Russian institutions that were still assisting Iran's missile program. Mr. Savelyev said the letter was read to him by a member of Mr. Putin's staff.On Dec. 20, Russia's Federal Service for Currency and Export Control opened an investigation that concluded two months later that Baltic State was indeed transferring expertise that could be useful to Iran's missile program and, therefore, was acting contrary to Russian national interests.The deputy director of the export control agency, Sergei F. Yakimov, issued an order to Baltic State on Feb. 11 to shut down the program. Now, three months later, the professors who worked on the Iran program are back teaching Russians.Last month, Russia's education minister, Vladimir M. Filippov, publicly rebuked Mr. Savelyev, saying he ''was given a severe reprimand and a warning'' for violating a ''whole series'' of secret orders from the ministry pertaining to educational services to Iran.But even as Mr. Savelyev was being disciplined, Russia's Ministry of Defense was defending the program for Iranian students. A top Russian defense official argued that the investigation of Mr. Savelyev did ''not contain evidence of violation of Russian legislation on military-technical cooperation and export control.''First Deputy Minister of Defense Nikolai V. Mikhailov stated, in a letter to the export control ministry, ''The Ministry of Defense does not see danger to the security of the Russian Federation in education of foreign citizens including the citizens of Iran.''The university's program of courses for Iranian students was carefully screened by the Ministry of Defense and other experts, he said, and added, ''On the whole, the higher education of foreign citizens in Russian language and Russian technical standards is extremely useful for Russia in strategic terms.''
W. may have gone too far this time.Americans can forgive him not knowing that Gen. Pervez Musharraf seized power in Pakistan.W. may have gone too far this time.Americans can forgive him not knowing that Gen. Pervez Musharraf seized power in Pakistan.But can we forgive him not knowing that Sarah Jessica Parker quaffs Cosmopolitans in Manhattan?So he thinks the Taliban is a rock band. We can live with that. But he's never heard of ''Sex and the City''?Now there's an ominous lacuna. Americans actually care about TV.A reporter for Glamour magazine, David France, interviewed Governor Bush on ''women's issues'' by playing a game of ''verbal Rorschach'':  ''I was rattling off names and concepts, and he was telling me the first thought that came to his mind.'' (W. still likes to live dangerously.)Mr. France said ''Phyllis Schlafly.'' Mr. Bush replied, ''Icon of the conservative right.'' Mr. France said ''Madonna.'' Mr. Bush replied, ''I'm not into pop music.'' Mr. France said ''Gloria Steinem.'' Mr. Bush replied, ''Uh, pioneer.''Mr. France said ''Sex and the City.'' Mr. Bush's face ''blistered in a purple fury,'' and his eyes narrowed and glowered. The candidate clearly thought he was being challenged on his claim of monogamy or support of teenage abstinence.Gordon Johndroe, Mr. Bush's press aide, tried to clear up the confusion. ''Governor,'' he said, ''it's an HBO television show.''''We've been on the campaign trail,'' Mr. Johndroe told Mr. France apologetically.But even when the governor is home, he told me in an interview last October, he doesn't go out to the movies or watch much TV -- except sports. He doesn't ordinarily look at political talk shows or late-night comics or network series or TV movies, or even zap around with his ''flicker,'' as he calls it, to get a feel for what the country's talking about.He may be the only Regis virgin left in America.''Culturally adrift,'' he cheerfully confessed.Those who are brainy about global issues are often not up on pop culture. And those who know about the Wu-Tang Clan may not know the intricacies of the World Trade Organization. But it's rare to get someone who has zero curiosity about either the big picture or the little picture.Mr. Bush has Condi Rice and a raft of coaches to prop him up on foreign affairs. But, as Broderick Crawford said of Judy Holliday's Billie Dawn in ''Born Yesterday,'' who's going to buy the kid some culture?It's easy to imagine how further free-associating on prime time could get the guy in all sorts of trouble.''West Wing''?''Next stop.''''Law and Order''?''Can't get enough of it.''''The Simpsons''?''Alan and Ann are good folks.''''Mad About You''?''Hope all the women voters are.''''NYPD Blue''?''That's Rudy's problem.''''La Femme Nikita''?''That's Putin's problem.''''Sports Night''?''Every night.''''Walker, Texas Ranger''?''Made money. Sold the team.''''Boy Meets World''?''That's my story.''''Whose Line Is It Anyway?''''I won't play gotcha with drug questions.''''Queen Latifah''?''Ethiopia?''''The Pretender''?''It was a tough primary, but I've always respected John.''''Friends''?''I listened and he listened. And now we've got a good relationship.''''When Animals Attack''?''I'm glad Pat Buchanan left the party.''''Ladies Man''?''He's leaving. I'll restore honor to the Oval Office.''''Politically Incorrect''?''President Gore.''''Access Hollywood''?''That's Democratic money.''''Buffy''?''Uncle Bucky's wife.''''King of Queens''?''I'm a better person for meeting with those Log Cabin Republicans.''''Just Shoot Me''?''Your questions weren't so bad. A little on the couch.''''Charmed''?''Same here.''
For a defeated candidate in the Republican presidential race, Senator John McCain has not suffered from lack of attention. With his high poll numbers, Mr. McCain might have made a credible  third-party candidate in November. Yesterday, however, he took the prudent course and endorsed Gov. George W. Bush, joking that he preferred taking his medicine now rather than later. Clearly he figured that he had a brighter future inside the G.O.P. than as a spoiler outside it. It was disappointing that Mr. Bush offered no concessions on campaign reform or other issues in return for an endorsement he really needed.There is a certain G.O.P. ritual for defeated candidates to endorse the nominees of their parties, but it often goes awry. In 1976 Gov. Ronald Reagan of California gave such a tepid endorsement of President Gerald Ford that Mr. Ford never fully recovered. Back in 1960 Richard Nixon, then the vice president, was so eager to win the endorsement of Gov. Nelson Rockefeller of New York that he agreed to a set of party principles, known as the Fifth Avenue compact, that made him suspect among conservative Republicans.For a defeated candidate in the Republican presidential race, Senator John McCain has not suffered from lack of attention. With his high poll numbers, Mr. McCain might have made a credible  third-party candidate in November. Yesterday, however, he took the prudent course and endorsed Gov. George W. Bush, joking that he preferred taking his medicine now rather than later. Clearly he figured that he had a brighter future inside the G.O.P. than as a spoiler outside it. It was disappointing that Mr. Bush offered no concessions on campaign reform or other issues in return for an endorsement he really needed.There is a certain G.O.P. ritual for defeated candidates to endorse the nominees of their parties, but it often goes awry. In 1976 Gov. Ronald Reagan of California gave such a tepid endorsement of President Gerald Ford that Mr. Ford never fully recovered. Back in 1960 Richard Nixon, then the vice president, was so eager to win the endorsement of Gov. Nelson Rockefeller of New York that he agreed to a set of party principles, known as the Fifth Avenue compact, that made him suspect among conservative Republicans.In approaching the meeting with Mr. McCain yesterday, Mr. Bush seemed to have this history in mind. He made it clear that he wanted the senator's endorsement, but did not want to seem to want it too much. In their joint news conference the governor tried to stress how much they had in common. But he did not look especially pleased about Mr. McCain's vow to continue pressing his agenda. He may have been wondering whether the senator would try to do that at the convention in Philadelphia this summer.The continuing popularity of Mr. McCain can be seen in many surveys, including a recent NBC/Wall Street Journal poll showing that 23 percent of the voters would prefer him over Mr. Bush or Vice President Al Gore. The USA Today/CNN/Gallup poll shows him with higher approval ratings than either man. The Bush campaign has always been quick to assert that Mr. McCain got his biggest victories in states where independents and Democrats could join with Republicans and vote in the primary. But it is these independent-minded voters who will determine the winner in November. It will not be easy for either Mr. Bush or Mr. Gore, both wealthy political heirs, to attract voters who are drawn to Mr. McCain's outsider appeal.Mr. Bush, for his part, has been resistant to identifying with two issues that seem intrinsic to Mr. McCain's appeal. One is campaign finance reform, particularly the McCain-Feingold soft-money ban, which Mr. Bush opposes. Another is Mr. McCain's opposition to a gigantic tax cut that would use up the budget surplus. Mr. Bush probably feels locked in on taxes, but he would be smart to adopt Mr. McCain's stand on campaign finance reform. Otherwise he may find that McCain voters are as hard to get as the senator's endorsement was.
THE SENATEKENNEDY FOE IN TROUBLE -- Jack E. Robinson III, the ill-fated Republican challenger for Edward M. Kennedy's Senate seat, faces a new adversity, and one potentially fatal for his campaign. As of 5 p.m. yesterday, the Massachusetts secretary of state's office had certified only 5,122 of the 10,000 signatures Mr. Robinson needed by that hour to officially qualify to run. So unless he has some 5,000 signatures stashed out there that can readily and unquestionably be certified, he has failed to make the ballot, said the secretary of state, William F. Galvin. ''It's very much up in the air whether he will make it or not,'' Mr. Galvin said. If he does not, Mr. Galvin added, it would mean that Massachusetts Republicans had failed to field a United States Senate candidate for the first time since senators were first elected by popular vote, back in 1916. Mr. Robinson offered no explanation for what happened to his signature-gathering effort or his campaign in general -- a campaign he had sworn to continue despite a raft of damaging accusations and incidents, including traffic troubles and bad behavior toward women. Senator Kennedy has faced a Republican challenger in every campaign since he was first elected to the Senate in 1964.Carey Goldberg (NYT)THE SENATEKENNEDY FOE IN TROUBLE -- Jack E. Robinson III, the ill-fated Republican challenger for Edward M. Kennedy's Senate seat, faces a new adversity, and one potentially fatal for his campaign. As of 5 p.m. yesterday, the Massachusetts secretary of state's office had certified only 5,122 of the 10,000 signatures Mr. Robinson needed by that hour to officially qualify to run. So unless he has some 5,000 signatures stashed out there that can readily and unquestionably be certified, he has failed to make the ballot, said the secretary of state, William F. Galvin. ''It's very much up in the air whether he will make it or not,'' Mr. Galvin said. If he does not, Mr. Galvin added, it would mean that Massachusetts Republicans had failed to field a United States Senate candidate for the first time since senators were first elected by popular vote, back in 1916. Mr. Robinson offered no explanation for what happened to his signature-gathering effort or his campaign in general -- a campaign he had sworn to continue despite a raft of damaging accusations and incidents, including traffic troubles and bad behavior toward women. Senator Kennedy has faced a Republican challenger in every campaign since he was first elected to the Senate in 1964.Carey Goldberg (NYT)THE STATESSWITCHING TO DEMOCRATS -- It is not clear yet whether it is a real trend, and if so why, but the conversion of Southern Republicans to the Democratic Party may be spreading. It began last month with two South Carolina legislators. Then a few days ago, a Georgia state representative, Randy Sauder, who represents the Atlanta suburb of Smyrna, became the first Georgia Republican in 16 years to switch to the Democrats. Another Republican state legislator, Buddy DeLoach of Hinesville, is becoming an independent. Mr. Sauder, who switched just before the filing deadline to prevent any Republicans from running against him, said he was disappointed in the Republican Party's rigidity on issues like education. Republicans vowed to run one of their own against him as an independent candidate. Over the past few decades, those switching parties in the South were mostly Democrats turning Republican.David Firestone (NYT)THE DEMOCRATSEYE ON 2004 RACE? -- Though this year's presidential primary season is not officially over, a coming fund-raiser in Georgia is already stoking speculation about races four years or so down the road. Next Monday, Jeanne Shaheen, the Democratic governor of New Hampshire, will be the beneficiary of an event in Atlanta -- a bit south of Concord -- that planners hope will raise at least $25,000 for her re-election. And one of the hosts, as well as one of the contributors, will be Georgia's governor, Roy Barnes, a first-term Democrat who is beginning to win national attention for his policies on improving schools and limiting sprawl. Robert S. Kahn, Mr. Barnes's chief of staff, says his boss was simply supporting a fellow Democratic governor, not pocketing a chit to be cashed later, in time for New Hampshire's first-in-the-nation primary in 2004 or 2008. ''The only election he's interested in, other than legislative elections, is his own re-election,'' Mr. Kahn insisted. The event is being organized by Michael Coles, a prominent party fund-raiser and Barnes ally who met Ms. Shaheen while working for Vice President Al Gore in New Hampshire last winter.Kevin Sack (NYT)Correction:  May 12, 2000, Friday  A report in the Campaign Briefing column on Wednesday about the United States Senate race in Massachusetts misstated the year the incumbent, Edward M. Kennedy, was first elected. It was 1962, not 1964.Correction: May 12, 2000, FridayA report in the Campaign Briefing column on Wednesday about the United States Senate race in Massachusetts misstated the year the incumbent, Edward M. Kennedy, was first elected. It was 1962, not 1964.<br><br>
INTERNATIONALA3-19Sierra Leone Rebel Missing; Europeans Are Evacuated  The whereabouts of the rebel leader Foday Sankoh were unknown, a day after a bloody confrontation at his house. Mr. Sankoh's forces hold 498 United Nations soldiers and civilians hostage. The streets of Freetown remained tense, as British paratroopers evacuated hundreds of Europeans. The United States sent a military team to Nigeria to prepare a West African force.A1Fear a New War May Break Out  A Security Council delegation in Africa abruptly shifted its attention from the crisis in Congo to the Ethiopian-Eritrean border, where hundreds of thousands of troops are believed to be preparing for war.A10INTERNATIONALA3-19Sierra Leone Rebel Missing; Europeans Are Evacuated  The whereabouts of the rebel leader Foday Sankoh were unknown, a day after a bloody confrontation at his house. Mr. Sankoh's forces hold 498 United Nations soldiers and civilians hostage. The streets of Freetown remained tense, as British paratroopers evacuated hundreds of Europeans. The United States sent a military team to Nigeria to prepare a West African force.A1Fear a New War May Break Out  A Security Council delegation in Africa abruptly shifted its attention from the crisis in Congo to the Ethiopian-Eritrean border, where hundreds of thousands of troops are believed to be preparing for war.A10Nigerian Money Believed Found  Investigators pursuing what Nigeria says are billions of dollars looted during the rule of the late Sani Abacha found $630 million in Luxembourg accounts linked to his sons.A11Move to Impose Kosovo Limit  The Senate Appropriations Committee voted, 23 to 3, to require Congressional approval for American peacekeeping forces to remain in Kosovo beyond July 2001.A8Lining Up for China Trade Bill  Former Presidents Gerald R. Ford and Jimmy Carter joined President Clinton, Vice President Al Gore and an array of senior officials from Democratic and Republican administrations to press Congress to approve the China trade bill.A14Softening Stance on Austria  At least 6 of the 15 members of the European Union express a readiness to work toward suspending sanctions imposed on Austria after Jorg Haider's rightist Freedom Party was included in the government.A19Indonesia Human Rights Trial  Indonesian soldiers admitted that they had executed civilians in Aceh Province, but they argued that they were not guilty of murder because they were following orders.A5World BriefingA16NATIONALA20-29McCain Endorses Bush, Citing Goals and Values  Senator John McCain endorsed Gov. George W. Bush and pledged to help the de facto Republican presidential nominee win the White House for their party. The announcement followed a private 90-minute meeting in Pittsburgh between the two primary campaign rivals. Mr. McCain indicated that common goals and shared values transcended the animosity that grew out of their campaign.A1Perot May Miss Convention  Ross Perot, who founded the Reform Party and was its presidential candidate in 1992 and 1996, will not attend its convention if Patrick J. Buchanan is its nominee, an aide said.A29Ex-Governor Is Convicted  A Federal jury in Baton Rouge, La., found former Gov. Edwin W. Edwards guilty of racketeering, conspiracy and extortion related to the awarding of state riverboat casino licenses. Mr. Edwards, 72, a Democrat, could be sentenced to life in prison and be fined millions.A1Return of Thai Boy Blocked  A federal judge in Los Angeles delayed the deportation of a 2-year-old boy to Thailand, saying he was concerned about the child's safety. The boy was taken into custody by immigration agents who said he was being used as a decoy by a group smuggling women into the country.A21Flag Debate in South Carolina  The State House began a debate over the flying of the Confederate battle flag atop the Capitol. An all-white majority appeared willing to accept a Senate proposal that would move the flag to a Confederate monument in front of the building, but none of the House's 26 black members showed support for the measure.A20Marine Air Crash Inquiry  The Marine Corps attributed the fatal crash of a V-22 Osprey last month to a loss of lift caused by turbulence from the tilt-wing hybrid's rotors as the pilot descended quickly.A20'Big Game' Fever  People in Georgia, Illinois, Maryland, Massachusetts, Michigan, New Jersey and Virginia created a ticket-buying frenzy for the largest potential jackpot in the history of lotteries: $350 million.A20NEW YORK/REGIONB1-10$100 Million State Bailout Is Offered to Nassau  Governor Pataki offered the Long Island county a $100 million bailout, provided the debt-ridden government of one of the nation's wealthiest counties lets the state monitor its finances and budgets and agrees to big spending cuts over four years.A1Embassy Bombing Case  Attorney General Janet Reno has authorized federal prosecutors in New York to seek the death penalty against at least one defendant, Mohamed Rashed Daoud al-'Owhali, in the bombings of two American embassies in East Africa in 1998, according to defense lawyers. It would be the first death penalty case involving international terrorism.B1Safir Has Prostate Cancer  Police Commissioner Howard Safir, 58, said his doctors had told him that the disease was in an early stage and treatable, and should not affect his continuing as commissioner.B1SCIENCE/HEALTHA Break From La Nina  The Pacific cooling that brought disruptive weather for months may be easing, NASA said.A22EDUCATIONB10ARTSE1-14Art Seller Amends His Story  Kenneth A. Walton of Sacramento, who put a painting up for auction on the Internet for 25 cents and ended up making a $135,805 deal, admitted he had concocted part of the story used to describe the work and said he would be willing let the buyer out of the sale. The authenticity of the painting, possibly by Richard Diebenkorn, is yet to be determined.A1SPORTSD1-8Henderson's Future Clouded  The Mets placed outfielder Rickey Henderson on waivers.D1Knicks Even Series With Heat  The Knicks beat Miami, 82-76, in Game 2 of their four-of-seven-game, second-round-playoff series.D1BUSINESS DAYC1-24E-Mail Virus Investigation  A bank employee in Manila was released after being held overnight as a suspect in the inquiry into a computer program that disrupted systems around the world. But Philippine officials said the man must reappear in 10 days and that they were examining a list of 10 people linked to a computer college in Manila.C1Car Company Sold for $15  BMW of Germany sold its money-losing Rover subsidiary to the Phoenix Consortium of Britain for the nominal sum of $:10. Phoenix wants to maintain the troubled British automaker as a mass producer of cars and a guarantor of thousands of British jobs.C1Cisco Reports Strong Results  Cisco Systems, the leading hardware supplier for the Internet, said after regular trading hours that quarterly profits had beaten expectations and that it had posted a 55 percent gain in sales. Before the announcement, Cisco's stock was unchanged, at $62.75. Earlier in the week, its shares fell after an article in Barron's questioned the company's high valuation and acquisition strategy.C2Business DigestC1OBITUARIESB9DININGF1-14EDITORIALA30-31Editorials: Mr. McCain's medicine; John Deutch and the law; thoroughly modern marriages.Columns: Paul Krugman, Maureen Dowd.CrosswordE12  TV ListingsE13  Public Lives=B2  WeatherD7
Al Gore goes Catskill.On a day when the nation's political attention seemed focused on Senator John McCain's endorsement of Gov. George W. Bush of Texas for president, the notably unethnic, Southern Baptist vice president said the heck with it and tried out a borscht belt routine before a largely Jewish audience here.Al Gore goes Catskill.On a day when the nation's political attention seemed focused on Senator John McCain's endorsement of Gov. George W. Bush of Texas for president, the notably unethnic, Southern Baptist vice president said the heck with it and tried out a borscht belt routine before a largely Jewish audience here.Mr. Gore, whose family comes from Tennessee, told the Anti-Defamation League that a sub-genre of music was proliferating in Nashville: the Jewish country-western song.No. 4 on the hit list, he said, was this: ''I Was One of the Chosen People -- Until She Chose Somebody Else.'' No. 3: ''The Second Time She Said 'Shalom,' I Knew She Meant Goodbye.'' No. 2: ''I've Got My Foot on the Glass, Now Where Are You?''And No. 1, which the vice president sang with a soft lilt and a twang: ''Mommas, Don't Let Your Ungrateful Sons Grow Up to Be Cowboys When They Could Very Easily Just Have Taken Over the Family Business That My Own Grandfather Broke His Back to Start and My Father Sweated Over for Years, Which Apparently Doesn't Mean Anything Now That You're Turning Your Back on Such a Gift.''The audience applauded and roared with laughter.But Mr. Gore really wanted to get in on the McCain-Bush act.He has been struggling for weeks against the attention paid to Senator McCain who, despite suspending his presidential campaign, remains enormously popular.And Mr. Gore, who has been lagging in the polls behind Mr. Bush, is still overtly courting the independent-minded voters who were attracted to Mr. McCain's candidacy.On April 30, Mr. Gore met privately with Mr. McCain at the Naval Observatory here, the vice president's official residence. And today, his little humor routine aside, Mr. Gore used his speech to about 450 members of the Anti-Defamation League to draw a contrast between Mr. McCain and Mr. Bush.Without naming the two Republicans, Mr. Gore said it was wrong not to condemn South Carolina's flying the Confederate battle flag atop the Statehouse in Columbia. Mr. Bush has said repeatedly that it is up to the state to decide whether to bring it down. Mr. McCain said the same thing in the Republican primaries, but last month he expressed regret for not having spoken out against the flag, saying he was afraid that such a stand would have cost him votes.Mr. Gore said today of the flag issue: ''We know it is wrong not only to support it, but to find it impossible to summon the moral courage to speak out about it. It is wrong to remain silent about it.''Mr. Gore's remarks allowed room for Mr. McCain's reversal but not for Mr. Bush's continued refusal to condemn the flying of the flag.The speech was an official one as vice president, and the league is a tax-exempt organization that cannot endorse political candidates. But it was certainly a political speech, designed to paint Mr. Bush as an extremist and undermine any impression that Mr. McCain's endorsement might make Mr. Bush more acceptable to independents.Independent voters are definitely on Mr. Gore's mind. Much of his campaign since March, when he won enough delegates to secure the Democratic nomination, has been geared toward swing voters in battleground states like Illinois, Michigan, Missouri, Ohio and Pennsylvania. And just as he has been wooing McCain supporters, Mr. Gore has also been going after the backers of Jesse Ventura, the independent governor of Minnesota.As it happened, Mr. Ventura was at the White House this morning for a pep rally in support of permanent trade relations with China, and Mr. Gore singled him out for thanks, among others, as did President Clinton. Last month, Mr. Gore also had a private dinner with Governor Ventura and his wife at the vice-presidential residence.The gateway topic for Mr. Gore to cozy up to both Mr. McCain and Mr. Ventura has been overhauling the campaign finance system, and aides said they expected the vice president to explore the topic publicly with both as the campaign progressed.Even though Mr. Gore's speech to the league poked fun at his own obvious differences with his audience, he still hoped to convey his commitment to their causes. ''I feel right at home here,'' he said.Mr. Gore's commitments included support for a national law against hate crimes. This amounted to another dig at Mr. Bush, who critics have said failed to shepherd through such a law in Texas. In a speech that extolled the virtues of tolerance, he sprinkled his comments with references to famous Jews.''Freud once spoke about the narcissism of slight difference, just as Einstein taught that the most destructive power known on earth is within the smallest state we know -- the inside of the atom,'' Mr. Gore said. ''The smallest differences sometimes unleash the most horrific violence.''He also won applause when he used the Hebrew phrase ''refua shlayma,'' to wish a complete recovery to Abraham Foxman, the league's national director, who recently underwent heart surgery.Still, Howard Berkowitz, national chairman of the league, said it was concerned that both candidates were injecting too much religion into the campaign. ''We want to make sure that one candidate doesn't out-religion the other,'' he said, citing Mr. Bush's comment that Jesus was his favorite philosopher. ''These things are better left in private,'' Mr. Berkowitz said.THE 2000 CAMPAIGN: THE VICE PRESIDENT
Citing common goals and shared values that transcended any of the bitterness between them, Senator John McCain at last endorsed Gov. George W. Bush today and pledged to help him achieve what Mr. McCain had wanted so badly for himself: a seat behind the desk in the Oval Office.''I look forward to enthusiastically campaigning for Governor Bush for the next six months,'' Mr. McCain said at a news conference here that was attended by more than 100 members of the news media, a reflection of just how unpredictable and closely watched the interactions between the Arizona senator and the Texas governor had become.Citing common goals and shared values that transcended any of the bitterness between them, Senator John McCain at last endorsed Gov. George W. Bush today and pledged to help him achieve what Mr. McCain had wanted so badly for himself: a seat behind the desk in the Oval Office.''I look forward to enthusiastically campaigning for Governor Bush for the next six months,'' Mr. McCain said at a news conference here that was attended by more than 100 members of the news media, a reflection of just how unpredictable and closely watched the interactions between the Arizona senator and the Texas governor had become.''I believe that it's very important that we restore integrity and honor to the White House,'' Mr. McCain said. ''I'm convinced that Governor Bush can do that more than adequately.'' [Excerpts, Page A28.]The announcement by Mr. McCain, which followed his private 90-minute meeting with Mr. Bush, heralded a new phase in a rocky political relationship that went from remarkable amity in December to extraordinary animosity in March and a tense, delicate dance of reconciliation over the last two months.Even more important, Mr. McCain's formal endorsement allowed Mr. Bush to lay claim to a unified party, to put an important piece of unfinished business behind him and to reach out to independent and swing voters with the blessing of Mr. McCain, who had proved to be alluring to that group in the primaries.But aides to Mr. Bush and Mr. McCain and political analysts said it remained unclear just how much work Mr. McCain would do on Mr. Bush's behalf -- and just how thoroughly the wounds of a lacerating primary season had healed. Mr. McCain's often tepid demeanor and restrained language today only heightened those questions.He repeated several times that his support for Governor Bush did not alter or diminish his commitment to an overhaul of campaign funding laws that was more sweeping than the plan favored by Mr. Bush.He did not actually use the words ''endorse'' or ''endorsement'' until reporters pressed him to make sure they understood correctly what was going on. At that point, Mr. McCain made something of a comedy routine, saying, ''I endorse Governor Bush,'' six times in a row. And when one journalist asked Mr. McCain if his actions today -- an almost inevitable obligation for any politician wishing to remain loyal to his party -- were like swallowing a dose of necessary medicine sooner rather than later, Mr. McCain answered, ''I think 'take the medicine now' probably is a good description.''Mr. Bush's aides chose to interpret the ambiguous remark as an example of the senator's sometimes deadpan humor, and it did not diminish their conviction, shared by many Republican operatives, that the Texas governor had accomplished something important today.Mr. McCain also made clear today that he had told Mr. Bush what he had been saying publicly for some time: that he had no interest in the vice presidency. He and Mr. Bush said they had discussed other strong candidates, including Governors Tom Ridge of Pennsylvania, Christine Todd Whitman of New Jersey, Tommy G. Thompson of Wisconsin and John Engler of Michigan.In accepting Mr. McCain's endorsement, Mr. Bush heaped praise on him, providing a stark contrast to some of the dismissive remarks that he and his aides had made about Mr. McCain after Mr. Bush effectively secured the Republican presidential nomination in mid-March.And he cast their acrimonious exchanges during the primaries as a beneficial experience that prepared him for the general election.''I told him point blank he made me a better candidate,'' Mr. Bush said, referring to their meeting in a room of the Westin William Penn hotel here. ''He waged a really good campaign and put me through my paces. And as a result of the campaign, I stand better prepared to become the president, which is exactly what I intend to do.''And Mr. McCain said it made no sense to revisit the past.''For me to look back in anger or with any rancor would be a mistake,'' he said. ''It would harm me. It would harm Governor Bush. And it would harm those who supported me in this campaign.''But the tone of his remarks suggested that his ire and that of his aides over the negative tactics used by Mr. Bush and his supporters in the primaries had not dissipated.That anger was rekindled today when Mr. Bush dodged a question about whether he would repudiate a  statement by the evangelist Pat Robertson two days ago that choosing Mr. McCain as a vice president would be dangerous.Rick Davis, who had managed Mr. McCain's campaign, said of the Bush response: ''I'm very disappointed. I don't think there's a Republican around who doesn't think Pat Robertson's comments Sunday were outside the mainstream of our party. What's the harm of saying that?''Political analysts said Mr. McCain's eventual endorsement of Mr. Bush was never really in much doubt, in part because the senator, seen as something of a maverick in his own party, needed to show his  peers that he could follow the loyal, polite course. That would be critical if Mr. Bush loses and Mr. McCain seeks to become the party's nominee four years from now.But the road leading to this point was bumpy, and it was not clear until Monday that this morning's meeting, scheduled a month ago, would bring the waiting to an end. Mr. McCain's previous statements that he would support the party's nominee fell short of a formal seal of approval and fueled speculation, which Mr. Bush's aides were eager to quell, about what was taking so long.The two men's aides said Mr. Bush did not offer Mr. McCain anything concrete in exchange for his support. And one McCain supporter said efforts by the aides to hammer out a document detailing joint policy goals had failed.But Mr. McCain's aides have let Bush campaign officials know that the Arizona senator would like a prominent speaking role at the Republican National Convention, and the Bush campaign has indicated interest in making that happen.Coming out of the meeting, both Mr. McCain and Mr. Bush acknowledged that they still had policy disagreements, although they declined to linger on them. During the primaries, for example, Mr. McCain repeatedly asserted that the size of Mr. Bush's proposed tax cut might jeopardize the health of Social Security.And Mr. McCain's vision of campaign finance reform, for example, includes bans on unlimited donations to political parties from both corporations and individuals; Mr. Bush does not think individual contributions should be limited.Aides to both politicians said there had not yet been any discussion about specific ways in which Mr. McCain could or would bolster Mr. Bush's campaign.But several Republican strategists in Washington said that Mr. McCain would probably wind up doing a great deal and that his tone today simply reflected the difficulty of accepting that it was finally time to cede the stage to someone else.''He went from huge media star and man-of-the-moment to having to fall back in line,'' said William Dal Col, who managed Steve Forbes's campaign for the Republican nomination. ''But it'll get better and better as time goes by, and if he wants to run in 2004, the smart thing for him to do is be as energetic and pro-Bush as possible.''Nelson Warfield, who was the press secretary for the 1996 presidential campaign of Bob Dole, acknowledged that Mr. McCain was ''flippant and unconventional'' in delivering his endorsement but that his manner did not change ''how important it really is.''Let's face it, in the immediate aftermath of McCain's defeat, there was furious speculation that he might run as a third-party candidate,'' Mr. Warfield said. ''As recently as last week, there was a poll that showed McCain, in a hypothetical three-way race, with more than 20 percent. Any time you get endorsed by someone with that kind of star quality is a very good day.''THE 2000 CAMPAIGN: THE REPUBLICANS
FATES-J. Gilbert, on May 1, 2000. Beloved husband of Faye Appleberry. Proud, adoring father of Amy, Gib, Decia. Smitten fatherin-law of Yolanda. Friend of Bushrod and Mazie. Born Sept. 29, 1913, in Newark, NJ to Dora Racicot and Joseph Faatz, Gil graduated from the University of Virginia in 1937. After a brief stint in legitimate theater, his career as a pioneer in T.V. was launched with CBS in 1941 and, after service in the Coast Guard during WWII, continued for some 50 years, most with Goodson-Todman Productions, where he produced such classic game and panel shows as ''To Tell the Truth,'' ''I've Got a Secret,'' and ''What's My Line?'' An avid fisherman, seasoned world traveler, relentless photographer, jazz aficionado, skilled tinkerer, sublime dancer, passable but enthusiastic golfer, peerless raconteur, Gil's warmth, intelligence, humor and generosity will be missed and long remembered by legions of friends and acquaintances. His life, spirit and knowledge have enriched us in innumerable ways. His tragic loss will be keenly and permanently felt. Faye, Amy, Gib & Yolanda, Decia, BertaFATES-J. Gilbert, on May 1, 2000. Beloved husband of Faye Appleberry. Proud, adoring father of Amy, Gib, Decia. Smitten fatherin-law of Yolanda. Friend of Bushrod and Mazie. Born Sept. 29, 1913, in Newark, NJ to Dora Racicot and Joseph Faatz, Gil graduated from the University of Virginia in 1937. After a brief stint in legitimate theater, his career as a pioneer in T.V. was launched with CBS in 1941 and, after service in the Coast Guard during WWII, continued for some 50 years, most with Goodson-Todman Productions, where he produced such classic game and panel shows as ''To Tell the Truth,'' ''I've Got a Secret,'' and ''What's My Line?'' An avid fisherman, seasoned world traveler, relentless photographer, jazz aficionado, skilled tinkerer, sublime dancer, passable but enthusiastic golfer, peerless raconteur, Gil's warmth, intelligence, humor and generosity will be missed and long remembered by legions of friends and acquaintances. His life, spirit and knowledge have enriched us in innumerable ways. His tragic loss will be keenly and permanently felt. Faye, Amy, Gib & Yolanda, Decia, Berta
To the Editor:Re ''Bush's Friendlier Path to Clean Air'' (Op-Ed, May 9): Incentive-based efforts are, as Lynn Scarlett notes, a positive mechanism for land preservation in Texas. But she doesn't mention Gov. George W. Bush's most notable legacy in regard to land preservation.To the Editor:Re ''Bush's Friendlier Path to Clean Air'' (Op-Ed, May 9): Incentive-based efforts are, as Lynn Scarlett notes, a positive mechanism for land preservation in Texas. But she doesn't mention Gov. George W. Bush's most notable legacy in regard to land preservation.In 1995 the governor advocated and signed a bill that restricted the rights of Texas cities to enact their own conservation or preservation measures, establishing a ''grandfather'' provision that protects many developers against local restrictions.Thus, policies like San Antonio's effort to preserve tracts of land that are home to large, native trees are rendered largely ineffectual. Given the full record, efforts to portray Governor Bush as a conservationist are absurd.FRANCINE S. ROMERO  San Antonio, May 9, 2000The writer is an assistant professor of public administration, University of Texas at San Antonio.
Gov. George W. Bush of Texas proposed a set of tax breaks today to encourage more people to buy long-term-care insurance and to ease the financial burden on people looking after ailing relatives at home.Under Mr. Bush's plan, which anticipates the fast-growing number of older Americans, people of any age who buy insurance for the kind of extended nursing-home stays not covered by other policies or by Medicare could fully deduct the annual premium from their taxes, whether they itemize deductions or not.Gov. George W. Bush of Texas proposed a set of tax breaks today to encourage more people to buy long-term-care insurance and to ease the financial burden on people looking after ailing relatives at home.Under Mr. Bush's plan, which anticipates the fast-growing number of older Americans, people of any age who buy insurance for the kind of extended nursing-home stays not covered by other policies or by Medicare could fully deduct the annual premium from their taxes, whether they itemize deductions or not.In addition, people with aging dependents at home could claim an extra exemption, which would amount to a nonitemized deduction of about $2,750.''To many of our seniors, illness can be a path to financial ruin, and this is one of the greatest fears of retirement and our nation must address it as we head into the 21st century,'' Mr. Bush, the likely Republican presidential nominee, told about 80 people at a nursing home here.''This cost can undermine the whole idea of security in retirement,'' he said. ''It's time for many Americans to prepare -- prepare for peace-of-mind insurance. It must become a central part of retirement planning in America.''The scope and expense of Mr. Bush's proposal was modest -- it would cost $7.4 billion over five years -- and some critics said it would make only the smallest of dents in a problem that is becoming ever more severe. But the plan represents an effort to demonstrate that Mr. Bush is paying heed to health care and to elderly people, an issue and a voting bloc that could be decisive in the presidential election this fall.Mr. Bush seemed to take the dynamics of the electorate into full account with remarks that aimed for a kind of political trifecta, singling out and offering reassurances not only to the elderly but also to baby boomers and to women. His message to baby boomers was that their anticipatory qualms about retirement were foremost in his mind, while his nod to women was his recognition that they typically shoulder most of the responsibility for older relatives.But the elderly were arguably his most important audience, because Vice President Al Gore has asserted that he has more thoughtful and responsible ideas for both health care and Social Security.Mr. Bush was clearly trying to challenge that claim. He intends to follow today's proposals with a speech on Monday outlining his philosophy on changing Social Security and Medicare and dealing with the high cost of prescription drugs.The high stakes of the presidential candidates' jostling over these issues was suggested by the fact the Gore campaign arranged for reporters to talk on the phone today with the secretary of health and human services, Donna E. Shalala.Dr. Shalala did not seem to be fully aware about what, exactly, Mr. Bush was recommending, but she said the plausibility of all of his proposals was thrown into doubt by his call for a tax cut of $483 billion over five years, which is much larger than the tax cut Mr. Gore favors.''There's no way, given the size of his tax cut, that he can pay for this,'' she said. ''It's an empty promise.''Dr. Shalala also said that Mr. Bush's financial incentives to buy long-term care insurance did nothing to address the flaws of many of the policies on the market and that the exemption that Mr. Bush would grant home caregivers was nowhere near as generous as the $3,000 tax credit that the Clinton administration had proposed and that Mr. Gore supports. The exemption, for someone in a 15 percent tax bracket would amount to only a few hundred dollars a year.Long-term care insurance, which fills a gap in what is provided by private and corporate health care policies and Medicare, covers the cost of an extended stay in a nursing home or assisted-living center for people whose financial resources have not dwindled to the point where they qualify for Medicaid. Figures provided by the Bush campaign indicated, only about 5 percent of Americans had such policies.An aide to Mr. Bush said that a 39-year-old person would pay an annual premium of about $358 for a policy that guaranteed two years of nursing home care, and $507 for a policy that guaranteed five years; a 64-year-old would pay about $1,265 for the two-year guarantee and $1,709 for the five-year one. The older the person buying the policy, the more it costs.More than 40 percent of Americans over the age of 65 have annual incomes of under $20,000. Joshua M. Wiener, a principal research associate at the Urban Institute in Washington, noted that these people would be unable to afford such a policy even after Mr. Bush's deduction, which would shave only a few hundred dollars off the price.''This is basically for the upper-middle-class elderly,'' Mr. Wiener said of Mr. Bush's proposal.The Bush plan also sets no income ceiling for eligibility, so that wealthy Americans in higher tax brackets would save more on the policies than middle-class Americans, because the tax deduction would be more valuable for them.But an aide to Mr. Bush said the plan was not intended primarily for these people, many of whom have jobs that already offer long-term care benefits and thus would not qualify for the deduction.And Mr. Bush, citing figures on the looming rise in the number of Americans over 65, said it was important to put mechanisms into place to encourage their financial security and to decrease the number who will end up needing public money and help.
In a Republican bid to woo the high-technology industry and please taxpayers, the House today rushed to the floor and then handily passed a bill to extend the current moratorium on new Internet taxes until 2006.The moratorium, which is due to expire in October 2001, forbids states to try to find new ways of taxing Internet use, like imposing taxes on monthly access charges for Internet service providers.In a Republican bid to woo the high-technology industry and please taxpayers, the House today rushed to the floor and then handily passed a bill to extend the current moratorium on new Internet taxes until 2006.The moratorium, which is due to expire in October 2001, forbids states to try to find new ways of taxing Internet use, like imposing taxes on monthly access charges for Internet service providers.The legislation passed today, which faces an uncertain future in the Senate, does not directly address the question of sales taxes; it would not stop states from trying to collect taxes for goods sold on the Internet.By failing to address sales taxes, however, the measure alarmed some traditional retailers, as well as state governments that say they have found it nearly impossible to collect taxes for goods sold online.''The single largest contributor to our economic prosperity has been the growth of information technology -- the Internet,'' said Representative John R. Kasich, an Ohio Republican. ''Why would we try to tax something, why would we try to abuse something, why would we try to limit something that generates unprecedented growth, wealth, opportunity and unprecedented individual power?''Critics of the bill say the moratorium, while seemingly benign, ignores the thorny question of how state and local governments can best collect taxes on the billions of dollars of merchandise sold over the Internet each year. These taxes are expected to provide a crucial future source of revenue for states, especially as more consumers buy goods online.The bill's opponents -- a consortium of retailers, small-business groups and governors -- say that consumers who buy merchandise over the Internet can easily circumvent the sales and ''use'' taxes that would be collected automatically if the same merchandise were bought at a bricks-and-mortar retail store.The National Governors' Association is working on the best way to collect electronic sales tax. Estimates have put the loss in sales tax revenue to the states at $8 billion a year by 2004.Retailers and small businesses have complained that the current system unfairly places at a disadvantage the traditional retailers that do not sell their wares online and must charge sales tax.''It's easy to imagine how these kinds of losses can affect state and local governments' ability to provide essential services,'' said Representative William D. Delahunt, a Massachusetts Democrat, citing the concerns of many governors. ''They will be compelled to cut back local services or raise income taxes or property taxes.''The bill even drew criticism from a few Republicans. Representative Ernest Istook of Oklahoma circulated a letter stating, ''The Internet should not be singled out to be taxed, nor to be freed from tax.''Still, the House voted overwhelmingly, 352 to 75, to pass the bill. A number of Democrats approved the measure after they received assurance that Congress would hold hearings concerning sales taxes and would try to come up with a solution.The moratorium ''has absolutely nothing to do with the sales tax -- we will have the opportunity to have that debate,'' said Representative Robert Goodlatte, a Virginia Republican.The House bill faces a murkier future in the Senate. Senator John McCain, chairman of the Commerce Committee, who advocates a permanent tax moratorium, canceled a hearing on the bill last month after Republican senators, some of them former governors, expressed reservations about extending the moratorium.The legislation also faces opposition from the Clinton administration, which signaled support today for a two-year moratorium. The full House today rejected a two-year extension in a separate vote.Gov. George W. Bush, the likely Republican presidential nominee, has said he will support an extension of the moratorium. But the governor must tread carefully around the issue because Texas, which does not have a state income tax, would stand to lose substantial revenue if sales taxes are not made workable on the Internet.A spokesman for Al Gore said the vice president supported a two-year extension of the moratorium ''at a minimum.'' If a five-year moratorium is put into place, ''it should include flexibility'' to adjust federal policies on Internet taxation ''to take into account the fast-paced change in the Internet world.''
THE REPUBLICANSA BOSNIAN BY ANY OTHER NAME -- Although aides to Gov. George W. Bush have dismissed as unimportant the several times he has mangled the proper terms for people of various nationalities, they were elated by a report yesterday that his adversary, Vice President Al Gore, had committed a similar error. Karen P. Hughes, Mr. Bush's communications director, gleefully broadcast the bulletin that Mr. Gore had referred to Bosnians as Bosniaks. ''It can happen to the best of us,'' Ms. Hughes said, ''as I hope the vice president will concede.'' Yes, but. As it turns out, Bosniak is an apparently acceptable alternative, listed in some dictionaries, so Mr. Gore spoke correctly. And Ms. Hughes got no more mileage out of the incident than she had with a disapproving recitation on Tuesday night of Jewish jokes that the vice president had publicly told. Where was the outrage? Not among the Bush press corps, whose members were too busy laughing to be on political-correctness patrol.Frank Bruni (NYT)THE REPUBLICANSA BOSNIAN BY ANY OTHER NAME -- Although aides to Gov. George W. Bush have dismissed as unimportant the several times he has mangled the proper terms for people of various nationalities, they were elated by a report yesterday that his adversary, Vice President Al Gore, had committed a similar error. Karen P. Hughes, Mr. Bush's communications director, gleefully broadcast the bulletin that Mr. Gore had referred to Bosnians as Bosniaks. ''It can happen to the best of us,'' Ms. Hughes said, ''as I hope the vice president will concede.'' Yes, but. As it turns out, Bosniak is an apparently acceptable alternative, listed in some dictionaries, so Mr. Gore spoke correctly. And Ms. Hughes got no more mileage out of the incident than she had with a disapproving recitation on Tuesday night of Jewish jokes that the vice president had publicly told. Where was the outrage? Not among the Bush press corps, whose members were too busy laughing to be on political-correctness patrol.Frank Bruni (NYT)BUSH AHEAD IN NEW POLL -- The latest national presidential preference poll shows Mr. Bush taking a substantial eight-point lead over Mr. Gore, 51 percent to 43 percent. The poll, published yesterday in The Los Angeles Times, surveyed 1,211 registered voters, and has a margin of sampling error of plus or minus three percentage points. It was conducted from May 4 to 7, just about the same time that a poll done for the Pew Research Center for the People and the Press found Mr. Bush barely edging Mr. Gore, 46 percent to 45 percent. That poll, conducted May 2 to 6 and covering 940 registered voters, has a margin of sampling error of plus or minus four percentage points. Meanwhile, in polls conducted last week in six of the largest and most politically important states by the American Research Group of Manchester, N.H., Mr. Bush leads Mr. Gore by 7 percentage points in Florida, 47 points in Texas and 3 points in Pennsylvania, whereas Mr. Gore leads by 14 points in California and 20 in New York. In Illinois, there is a tie. Over all, according to the latest available state polls, Mr. Bush is ahead in 17 states (good for 183 of the required 270 electoral votes), and Mr. Gore leads in 10 states (good for 146 electoral votes).Irvin Molotsky (NYT)THE DEMOCRATSA MESSAGE FROM WOMEN -- Mr. Gore, who polls indicate is having difficulty maintaining the traditional Democratic advantage with women, has been put on notice by two dozen women's organizations that he needs to work harder to win women's political allegiance. In an hourlong session on Tuesday in the Old Executive Office Building with about 40 leaders of the women's groups, the vice president was told he needed a better media strategy to convey his positions on issues like Social Security, paycheck fairness, domestic violence and abortion. ''The message isn't getting out to women,'' Kim Gandy, executive vice president of the National Organization for Women, said in an interview after the meeting. Nancy Zirkin, a spokeswoman for the American Association of University Women, said the meeting was requested four months ago, on a nonpartisan basis, so the women could hold a general discussion with Mr. Gore about their concerns. She said the request was not prompted by the vice president's lag in the polls or by growing polling evidence that the Democratic candidate's edge with women was beginning to erode. Mr. Gore, who was accompanied at the meeting by Donna Brazile, his campaign manager; Donna E. Shalala, the secretary of health and human services, and Alexis M. Herman, the secretary of labor, agreed to additional meetings. Ms. Brazile suggested after the meeting that the women's groups could help him get out his message. ''But we're not in any trouble with women voters,'' she insisted.Katharine Q. Seelye (NYT)
A top city welfare official agreed to pay a Wisconsin company $1.1 million for consulting services it provided last year even though no written contract existed and no competitive bidding for the work had taken place, an arrangement the city comptroller says violated standard contracting procedures.From April 1999 until last week, city welfare officials asked Kaiser Group, of Waukesha, Wis., to provide advice on placing welfare recipients in jobs, gave the company an office and promised to find a way to pay it retroactively, said Peter E. Kaiser, the company's president.A top city welfare official agreed to pay a Wisconsin company $1.1 million for consulting services it provided last year even though no written contract existed and no competitive bidding for the work had taken place, an arrangement the city comptroller says violated standard contracting procedures.From April 1999 until last week, city welfare officials asked Kaiser Group, of Waukesha, Wis., to provide advice on placing welfare recipients in jobs, gave the company an office and promised to find a way to pay it retroactively, said Peter E. Kaiser, the company's president.But Mr. Kaiser said that the city had ultimately never paid his company for the work, and that last week, after a review of the arrangement by the mayor's office, his staff was ordered to vacate its city office.Mr. Kaiser said he could not explain why the city had reneged on the arrangement.''We were told to continue on, and it would be worked out,'' Mr. Kaiser said this week.City officials said yesterday that they had intended to pay Kaiser for its work but that the mayor's office reversed that plan in December.City Comptroller Alan G. Hevesi, who has not formally reviewed the city's dealings with Kaiser, said that no company should be providing services to the city unless it has a contract to do so.The latest contracting problems come as City Hall lawyers and contracting officers are scrambling to review a series of multimillion-dollar welfare-to-work contracts awarded by the Human Resources Administration that are now the subject of investigation. In the last week, the United States attorney's office in Manhattan has subpoenaed bid documents, e-mail messages and other city correspondences involving other welfare contracts, a city official said.The city has until tomorrow morning to turn over its records related to $104 million worth of these contracts it intended to give to Maximus, a McLean, Va., company, the city official said.Wisconsin officials said this week that they were also auditing records about Maximus. The company is also a major welfare-to-work contractor there, and it recently acknowledged that it mistakenly charged Wisconsin's welfare-to-work program for an unspecified amount of bills associated with pursuing the New York City contract.Maximus and Kaiser Group are among the handful of consultants hired by the New York City Human Resources Administration after Jason A. Turner, a former Wisconsin state official, was appointed commissioner by Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani in January 1998.Mr. Turner, who built himself a national reputation in Wisconsin while helping lead that state's welfare-to-work effort in the mid-1990's, was hired by Mr. Giuliani to figure out a way to encourage thousands of able-bodied adults on welfare to leave city assistance programs by finding jobs in the private sector.The city has long hired outside consultants to help it provide services to the poor and disadvantaged.What differed after Mr. Turner arrived, several former and current city officials said, is that the new commissioner felt that he needed to retain several outside experts quickly to provide him advice on how to reorganize the agency's operations.A New York University political science professor, Lawrence Mead, was brought in one day a week to provide advice for about $1,000 a day, city officials said. And an executive at a conservative social-services research organization, the Hudson Institute of Indianapolis, was retained. That executive, Andrew Bush, was ultimately selected for a permanent high-level job as an agency administrator.Kaiser Group began providing advice to the Human Resources Administration in October 1998, when the company was hired under a contract with the State University at Albany. The university had access to state and federal financing aimed at helping local governments tackle the challenge of welfare reform.Eugene J. Monaco, special assistant to the provost at the Nelson A. Rockefeller College of Public Affairs and Policy at the State University at Albany, said that the state hired Kaiser Group after the company was highly recommended for the job by Mark Hoover, the city's first deputy welfare commissioner.Mr. Kaiser, his staff and two subcontractors were assigned to assist a city effort to convert its welfare enrollment centers into so-called job centers, which put more of an emphasis on finding employment than simply distributing benefits for the poor.But after the company completed $541,300 worth of work, the arrangement with the State University expired at the end of March 1999. The city officials asked the state to extend the deal, but the state said that any further work would have to be paid for by the city through its own contracting process, Mr. Monaco said.Mr. Kaiser said his company was advised by city officials to not worry about the financing issues. And he said his project manager, Grant Collins, continued to work out of an office at the city agency's headquarters.But by late 1999, Mr. Kaiser said, he became concerned about delays in payment and how much the city owed him, and he said he asked Mr. Hoover for assurances that he would be paid.Mr. Kaiser said he received a letter from Mr. Hoover last Dec. 8, notifying him that the company would be paid $1.1 million for its work from April through the end of the year.Mr. Kaiser said the letter promised that the payment would be made as part of more than $3 million in business the agency was expecting to give Mr. Kaiser's company over the next three years.Debra Sproles, a spokeswoman for the Human Resources Administration, did not dispute this account in her statement, noting that the agency had initially ''intended to reimburse Kaiser for services performed in 1999.''But she added that under advice of the Mayor's Office of Contracting, city officials, in mid-December 1999, changed their minds, deciding that the proposed new contract with Kaiser Group should cover only services starting this year. Mr. Kaiser said he was not informed about the reversal until last week.Mr. Hevesi said the entire episode with Kaiser reflected a widespread laxity in the contracting procedures at the city's welfare agency. In recent months, the Giuliani administration has dismissed Mr. Hevesi's criticisms of the agency's contracting procedures as politically motivated.''It is improper to have vendor work without a contract,'' Mr. Hevesi said. ''Such work would be unauthorized.''He added, ''It means that an agency is spending taxpayer money without going through the legal procedures that insure that money is spent properly.''
In a sign of possible turmoil in a highly sensitive criminal case, the Department of Justice has decided to replace at a critical moment the top prosecutor in its case against a scientist charged with mishandling nuclear weapon secrets at the Los Alamos National Laboratory.Patricia Chavez, a spokesman for the United States attorney's office in Albuquerque, where the case is being handled, said the department had decided to send from Washington a prosecutor to take control of the case from Bob Gorence, the locally based assistant United States attorney who had been in charge.In a sign of possible turmoil in a highly sensitive criminal case, the Department of Justice has decided to replace at a critical moment the top prosecutor in its case against a scientist charged with mishandling nuclear weapon secrets at the Los Alamos National Laboratory.Patricia Chavez, a spokesman for the United States attorney's office in Albuquerque, where the case is being handled, said the department had decided to send from Washington a prosecutor to take control of the case from Bob Gorence, the locally based assistant United States attorney who had been in charge.Ms. Chavez said Mr. Gorence, an experienced prosecutor who has pursued the case aggressively from its start last year, would remain ''a key member of the team'' handling the case against Wen Ho Lee, who was charged with illegally downloading top secret data on nuclear weapons.Seven of the computer tapes on which Mr. Lee downloaded the data have disappeared, and the government has charged that he intended to provide the information to a foreign government, China.Mr. Lee has vigorously denied the charges and has said he believes he was unfairly singled out for prosecution because he is Chinese-American.  Asian-Americans have come together to offer support, and have contended that he is a victim of racial discrimination. Although Mr. Lee has not been charged with espionage, he is being held under tight security and was twice denied bail.The change in prosecutors is surprising, in part, because it comes at a particularly sensitive time, when the defense and the government are expected to battle over how much nuclear weapon information can be submitted in the trial. The timing of this move heartened the defense.''This is good news for Dr. Lee, as Mr. Gorence was an experienced prosecutor,'' said Mark Holscher, one of Mr. Lee's lawyers.Mr. Gorence would not comment.The trial is not scheduled until November, but the defense has already filed motions to introduce at trial all of the information Mr. Lee is said to have downloaded, and the request is expected to be argued in court in the next couple of months. This could be the pivot around which the outcome of the trial turns, and it now might be handled by someone relatively new to a case that involves abstruse issues of nuclear technology as well as national security.If the judge rules that the information should be admitted, the government must decide whether to comply. The government has already argued that the information contains ''the crown jewels'' of the American nuclear arsenal and that releasing it would compromise the country's national security. But if it refused, it would probably have to drop the charges against Mr. Lee.If the judge rejects Mr. Lee's request, it could weaken his defense, which his lawyers have said rests on his claims that most of the data was already in the public realm, that by itself it was not enough to design a bomb and that it was not that useful without a variety of manuals and other tools not generally available.It was unclear whether Mr. Gorence would remain with the United States attorney's office at this point. But the defense lawyers made it clear that they would not tolerate any delays in the proceedings, and that they would settle for nothing less than the ability to use at his trial all the data Mr. Lee is accused of illegally downloading.
INTERNATIONALA3-19China Warns of Arms Race If U.S. Builds Missile Shield  China's chief arms negotiator, Sha Zukang, said the American proposal to build an antimissile defensive shield posed an unacceptable threat to China's security and could force Beijing to expand its own nuclear forces.A1INTERNATIONALA3-19China Warns of Arms Race If U.S. Builds Missile Shield  China's chief arms negotiator, Sha Zukang, said the American proposal to build an antimissile defensive shield posed an unacceptable threat to China's security and could force Beijing to expand its own nuclear forces.A1The Pentagon is assessing whether the United States can safely cut its nuclear arsenal to 2,000 warheads under a treaty with Russia.A12U.N. Troops Prepare for Battle  The United Nations ordered its peacekeeping troops in Sierra Leone to take up defensive positions and prepare to fight rebels advancing toward the capital, Freetown.A1Thousands of people fleeing the fighting headed toward Freetown. The whereabouts of a rebel leader, Foday Sankoh, remained unclear.A10Africa Allies at Odds  Rwanda and Uganda are threatening to turn their armies on each other if they cannot resolve the tensions that in recent days have flared up into small-scale skirmishes.A11U.N. Fails in Horn of Africa  A Security Council delegation ended a weeklong trip to Africa unable to persuade the leaders of Eritrea and Ethiopia to stop preparing for war and to resume talks.A10More AIDS Drugs for Africa  President Clinton ignored opposition from the pharmaceutical industry and issued an executive order to make AIDS drugs available far more cheaply in sub-Saharan Africa by easing patent restrictions.A7New Russian Prime Minister  President Vladimir V. Putin named as prime minister Mikhail M. Kasyanov, a chief foreign-debt negotiator and a liberal economics expert. Some experts said the move boded well for efforts to tame Russia's freewheeling style of capitalism.A12Lawyer Says Jew Denies Spying  One of 13 Iranian Jews being tried on charges of spying for Israel denied all accusations, a defense lawyer said, becoming the first of the group not to confess in court.A18World BriefingA8NATIONALA20-29Army Inquiry Said to Back Officer's Harassment Claim  The inspector general has concluded that the Army's highest-ranking woman, Lt. Gen. Claudia J. Kennedy, was a victim of inappropriate sexual advances by Gen. Larry G. Smith, Pentagon officials said.A1A Flag Plan in South Carolina  The House passed a measure that would take down the Confederate flag from atop the Capitol on July 1 and raise a smaller version at a nearby Confederate soldiers' memorial. The Senate has passed a similar measure. The governor said he backed the plan. But only 3 of the 26 black House members voted for the plan, and many denounced it.A20Fire Bears Down on Nuclear Lab  Winds blew a week-old fire toward the Los Alamos National Laboratory, forcing the evacuation of the town of Los Alamos, but officials expressed confidence that nuclear materials and chemical explosives at the lab were safe and protected.A20U.S. Replacing Prosecutor  The Justice Department has decided to replace Bob Gorence as the top prosecutor in the case against Wen Ho Lee, a scientist charged with mishandling nuclear weapon secrets at the Los Alamos National Laboratory. No explanation was given.A24State Dept. Faulted on Security  The State Department suffers from a systemic failure to protect secrets that is longstanding and far broader than the recent disclosed series of lapses, according to a range of administration officials.A262 Winners of Record Jackpot  Two winning tickets, one in Michigan and one in Illinois, were sold in the $366 million Big Game drawing.A25SCIENCE/HEALTHNo Bar to Saline Implants  The F.D.A. decided to permit two implant makers to continue marketing saline breast implants, despite new scientific evidence that some patients had had adverse effects.A28U.S. to Test H.I.V. Drug  The National Institutes of Health is set to begin full-scale tests of Remune, a vaccine to treat people already infected with H.I.V..A22NEW YORK/REGIONB1-14Giuliani and Hanover Talk About a Separation  Mayor Giuliani said he was seeking a separation from his wife, Donna Hanover, adding that as he battled prostate cancer he would need Judith Nathan, whom he describes as a ''very good'' friend, ''more now than maybe I did before.'' Ms. Hanover said that she had hoped to keep the marriage together but that she was now prepared to ''discuss the possibility of a legal separation.'' She also said she had withdrawn from the couple's public life several years ago ''because of his relationship with one staff member.'' An aide said she was referring to the mayor's former communications director, Cristyne Lategano-Nicholas.A1Representative Rick A. Lazio and Theodore J. Forstmann, a Wall Street investor, moved gingerly to position themselves in case Mr. Giuliani leaves the Senate race.B4Welfare Contract Questioned  A top city welfare official agreed to pay the Kaiser Group of Wisconsin $1.1 million for consulting services it provided last year, despite the absence of a written contract and competitive bidding. Comptroller Alan G. Hevesi said the arrangement violated standard procedures.B1Woman Killed on Queens Street  A 24-year-old Japanese woman who worked as a music promoter was fatally shot about 3:15 a.m. as she walked home on a quiet street in Elmhurst, the police said.B3New Jersey Race Narrowing  A poll suggested that Jon S. Corzine's million-dollar-a-week television advertising campaign was narrowing his race with former Gov. Jim Florio for the Democratic Senate nomination and driving up Mr. Florio's unfavorable ratings. The candidates are scheduled to debate tonight.B1Ruling on Access to Public Land  A Connecticut appeals court said Greenwich could no longer bar out-of-towners from its parks and beaches. Lawyers on both sides said the ruling could affect public access throughout the state.B8CIRCUITSG1-14SPORTSD1-8BUSINESS DAYC1-24Microsoft's Counterplan  Microsoft asked a federal judge to immediately throw out the government's proposal to break the company in two. It offered a series of proposals that it said were more appropriate than a breakup.A1Music Antitrust Case Settled  The F.T.C. announced a settlement of an antitrust case against the five largest music companies in the nation. Officials said a result should be significant price cuts for CD's.A1Scrutiny of Accountants Urged  The S.E.C. chairman, Arthur Levitt, called for more oversight and new rules on conflicts of interest at accounting firms, to preserve integrity in financial reporting.C1Business DigestC1OBITUARIESB15ARTSE1-14Auction House Intervenes  EBay canceled the sale of an abstract painting to a Dutch computer executive for $135,805, saying the seller, Kenneth A. Walton, had violated its rules in a way that artificially inflated the price.A1HOUSE & HOMEF1-18EDITORIALA30-31Editorials: Mr. Giuliani's turbulent time; moms marching for gun control; a weak but crafty Microsoft.  Columns: Bob Herbert, William Safire.BridgeE12  TV ListingsE13  CrosswordE12  WeatherD8  Public LivesB2
Congressional Democrats rallied today around a bill that would offer prescription drug benefits as part of the Medicare program, in contrast to the approach favored by Republicans, who want to subsidize private insurance to help pay such costs.Several dozen House and Senate Democrats joined in a display of unity at the White House, where they said they had agreed on a proposal to offer coverage of prescription drugs to all Medicare beneficiaries -- 39 million elderly or disabled people.Congressional Democrats rallied today around a bill that would offer prescription drug benefits as part of the Medicare program, in contrast to the approach favored by Republicans, who want to subsidize private insurance to help pay such costs.Several dozen House and Senate Democrats joined in a display of unity at the White House, where they said they had agreed on a proposal to offer coverage of prescription drugs to all Medicare beneficiaries -- 39 million elderly or disabled people.The proposal is similar to one offered by President Clinton, but it is somewhat more generous to beneficiaries and somewhat more expensive for the government.Mr. Clinton and lawmakers appeared in the White House Rose Garden with Betty Dizik, a 73-year-old widow who said she sometimes skipped prescribed medications for diabetes and a heart condition because she could not afford them.''I am not asking for a handout or for charity,'' Ms. Dizik said. ''I am willing to work and do my part. I am just asking for a little help.''The Democrats' proposal is embodied in a bill introduced today by the Senate minority leader, Tom Daschle of South Dakota, with 32 of the 45 Democratic senators as co-sponsors. The House Democratic leader, Representative Richard A. Gephardt of Missouri, said he would soon introduce a bill nearly identical to the Senate measure.In a Congress controlled by Republicans, the Democrats have no chance of seeing their bills enacted. But they hope that by taking a unified position, they can put pressure on the Republicans to enter negotiations leading to the enactment of Medicare drug benefits this year.Vice President Al Gore and many Congressional Democrats have denounced the Republicans as slow to act on the issue.But the president sounded more cooperative today. ''We all know we can't achieve our efforts without bipartisan support in the Congress,'' Mr. Clinton said. ''That's why, just as we are trying to do with the patient's bill of rights, we want to reach across the aisle to encourage Republican support, as well. This can and should be a truly bipartisan effort.''The Congressional Democrats, like Mr. Clinton, say Medicare should cover half of a person's drug expenses up to certain limits -- half of the first $2,000 in drug expenses starting in 2002. The ceiling would rise gradually. By 2009, Medicare would cover half of the first $5,000 in drug expenses.Some drugs cost much more than $5,000 a year. The Congressional Democrats would provide assistance for people with very high expenses; Medicare would pay their drug costs after they spent $3,000 or $4,000 of their own money.Mr. Daschle said his bill ''dedicates $50 billion'' to insurance covering such catastrophic expenses from 2003 to 2010. By contrast, the president requested $35 billion for the years from 2006 to 2010.Republicans are developing their own proposals. The chairman of the Senate Finance Committee, William V. Roth Jr., Republican of Delaware, is drafting legislation but has not given any hint of the details. House Republicans are fleshing out their proposal, under which the government would subsidize private insurance to help pay drug costs for Medicare beneficiaries.Congress and the administration are both scrutinizing drug prices. Federal officials said they were investigating several drug companies to see if they had overcharged Medicaid, Medicare or other government programs by overstating their wholesale prices.The American unit of Bayer A.G., the German drug company, said it had begun talks with the Justice Department in the hope of reaching a settlement over drug prices that would avoid costly litigation.In another sign of concern about drug costs, Senator James M. Jeffords, Republican of Vermont, introduced a bill that would make it easier for Americans to import medications from Canada, where drug prices are often much lower.Under Mr. Jeffords's bill, Americans could import a limited amount of prescription drugs, perhaps a three-month supply, for personal use. In addition, pharmacists and wholesalers could import certain prescription drugs and pass the discounts on to American consumers.The drug industry opposes the bill, saying it could expose Americans to adulterated or counterfeit drugs. But the bill instructs the Department of Health and Human Services to regulate imports to ensure that drugs are safe and effective.Mr. Clinton and Congressional Republicans generally say that Medicare drug benefits should be enacted as part of a more comprehensive effort to revamp Medicare.Chris Jennings, the president's health policy coordinator, today commended the sponsors of an ambitious bipartisan proposal to redesign Medicare, Senators John B. Breaux, Democrat of Louisiana, and Bill Frist, Republican of Tennessee. Mr. Jennings said the senators' efforts were ''quite encouraging.''
The president of the United Steelworkers of America, one of the nation's most powerful trade unions, said today that organized labor's support for Vice President Al Gore could be hurt by his recent lobbying for the China trade deal.George Becker, the Steelworkers' president, who played a pivotal role in getting the A.F.L.-C.I.O. to endorse the vice president, said he was angry that Mr. Gore was lobbying hard for the China deal after telling labor leaders that his views on trade would differ from President Clinton's.The president of the United Steelworkers of America, one of the nation's most powerful trade unions, said today that organized labor's support for Vice President Al Gore could be hurt by his recent lobbying for the China trade deal.George Becker, the Steelworkers' president, who played a pivotal role in getting the A.F.L.-C.I.O. to endorse the vice president, said he was angry that Mr. Gore was lobbying hard for the China deal after telling labor leaders that his views on trade would differ from President Clinton's.''We are not going to be forgiving on this,'' Mr. Becker said. ''Our members are not.''Mr. Becker declined to say what action, if any, his union might take because of its unhappiness with Mr. Gore's trade stance, but he said the vice president's position might alienate many supporters in his union.Most labor leaders have not publicly criticized Mr. Gore's support of the deal, which calls for permanently normalizing trade relations with China. Many labor leaders say that while they disagree with the vice president, they agree with him on most other issues and do not want to undercut his chances in November.Organized labor has made defeating the bill its top legislative priority, arguing that it would be wrong to normalize relations with a country where there are widespread human rights and labor rights violations.Douglas Hattaway, a spokesman for the Gore campaign, said the vice president is sympathetic to the Steelworkers' concerns and plans to continue working with the labor movement on a range of issues that affect working families. ''At the same time, he's been very clear about his position on this issue from the day he was endorsed by the A.F.L.-C.I.O. last October,'' Mr. Hattaway said. ''He believes the agreement is good for workers and good for the economy.''Mr. Becker made his remarks on a day when President Clinton predicted that the House would approve the China deal. Mr. Clinton told a radio interviewer, ''I think we'll get the votes, because I think it's the right thing for the country.''The House is scheduled to vote on the China bill the week of May 22, and the Senate, which lawmakers say will easily approve the measure, is expected to vote next month.Republican leaders in the House sought yesterday to bolster support for the bill by saying they were likely to back a bipartisan proposal that would set up a commission to monitor human rights in China. Speaker J. Dennis Hastert, an Illinois Republican, and Majority Leader Dick Armey, a Texas Republican, said they were close to a deal that would enable them to support the proposal.Representative Sander M. Levin, a Michigan Democrat, working closely with Representative Doug Bereuter, a Nebraska Republican, proposed such a commission as a way to secure more backing for the trade deal.Mr. Becker said he believed that the China bill would have a far more difficult chance of gaining House approval if Mr. Gore were not lobbying for it. ''This is a pretty close vote, and if he makes the difference in this, and we lose, I think there'll be a hell of a price to pay,'' Mr. Becker said.At the A.F.L.-C.I.O. convention last October, he said, many labor leaders felt more confident about endorsing Mr. Gore after he promised, if elected, to place more emphasis on worker rights in negotiating trade agreements than President Clinton has.''I would have expected him under the circumstances to keep out of the way on this,'' Mr. Becker said. ''He's twisting arms. He's putting himself in a position where he's directly opposed to where we're going.''Mr. Becker voiced a concern that many labor leaders have been murmuring for weeks. Many say they are finding it hard to excite union members to vote for and campaign for Mr. Gore when he is battling them on labor's No. 1 legislative issue.One House Democrat whom Mr. Gore has lobbied, Bob Clement of Tennessee, announced today that he would vote against the China bill. Another Democrat, Juanita Millender-McDonald of California, also announced her opposition. But Representative Ken Bentsen, a Texas Democrat, announced his support for the bill, saying he was encouraged by a White House plan to set up a commission that would study the problems of displaced workers.Some opponents assert that Mr. Gore is lobbying so hard to show that he is willing to take a stand unpopular with many supporters.In an interview with Diane Rehm, a Washington-based talk-show host, Mr. Clinton said yesterday that Mr. Gore's stance on China would help the vice president politically.''Even though some of the strongest elements of the Democratic Party and some of our best friends are on the other side of this fight, it shows he's willing to take an independent stand to do what he believes is right,'' Mr. Clinton said.
Speaker J. Dennis Hastert and the Senate majority leader, Trent Lott, agreed today to create a national security advisory panel of senior Republican experts in an effort to give more credibility to Congressional scrutiny and criticism of President Clinton's foreign policy.The creation of the panel, which is to be announced next week, coincides with growing alarm and distrust among many Republicans on Capitol Hill over crucial decisions Mr. Clinton will make in the coming weeks on missile defenses, nuclear arms reductions with Russia and other national security issues.Speaker J. Dennis Hastert and the Senate majority leader, Trent Lott, agreed today to create a national security advisory panel of senior Republican experts in an effort to give more credibility to Congressional scrutiny and criticism of President Clinton's foreign policy.The creation of the panel, which is to be announced next week, coincides with growing alarm and distrust among many Republicans on Capitol Hill over crucial decisions Mr. Clinton will make in the coming weeks on missile defenses, nuclear arms reductions with Russia and other national security issues.''There's a growing concern that we need to really monitor events on how our national security is safeguarded,'' said Mr. Lott's spokesman, John Czwartacki.Mr. Lott and Mr. Hastert, who met privately today on a number of issues, are forming the panel with the knowledge and implicit blessing of top aides to Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, the presumptive Republican presidential nominee. Indeed, the panel is likely to be stocked in part with experts who are advising Mr. Bush.Congressional aides said the panel of perhaps two dozen members would include former secretaries of defense and state, and other experts.Among those mentioned as leading candidates are Donald H. Rumsfeld, a former secretary of defense, and R. James Woolsey, a former director of central intelligence.The advisers would meet periodically to advise Mr. Lott and Mr. Hastert on national security issues. Their first task is likely to be counseling Republican leaders on Mr. Clinton's coming meeting in Moscow with President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia.''We have a very qualified pool of experts who hold positions of expertise that fall outside current government channels,'' Mr. Czwartacki said.''The idea is to establish a brain trust that can encompass all this talent and inform the opinions and decisions made by the leaders.''One senior House Republican aide said the group would be asked to submit reports on various issues to the Republican leadership with a final, wide-ranging report due in July, possibly for use by the speaker and majority leader on the campaign trail over the summer recess in August.The House and Senate already have committees intended to provide Mr. Lott and Mr. Hastert with the kind of advice and guidance they now seemingly feel they need from a distinguished group of outside experts.''There was a sense we needed to have people involved with the arms control issues to really provide counsel on a lot of important decisions,'' said a top House Republican aide.One vocal critic of the administration, Representative Curt Weldon, a Pennsylvania Republican, is thinking along the same lines as the two Republican leaders.Mr. Weldon said he would introduce a bill next week calling for the creation of a bipartisan national security advisory panel.Mr. Weldon said it would be modeled on a commission headed by Mr. Rumsfeld that two years ago conducted an assessment of the ballistic-missile threat to the United States.
As a million moms get set to march on behalf of gun control this weekend, it's not clear how this issue will play in voter decisions in the fall. The conventional wisdom has held for a long time that while proponents of more restrictions on firearms outnumber opponents, it's intensity that counts at the ballot box, and the Second Amendment crowd has had a big edge there.For a while it looked as if the killings at Columbine High School might change the political equation. In the months after the tragedy, not only did polls find an increased number of Americans favoring more restrictions, but there were indications that the proponents of gun control were more intent than in the past. For the first time ever, national polls were finding significant numbers of respondents volunteering in open-ended questions that gun control was the top issue facing the country.As a million moms get set to march on behalf of gun control this weekend, it's not clear how this issue will play in voter decisions in the fall. The conventional wisdom has held for a long time that while proponents of more restrictions on firearms outnumber opponents, it's intensity that counts at the ballot box, and the Second Amendment crowd has had a big edge there.For a while it looked as if the killings at Columbine High School might change the political equation. In the months after the tragedy, not only did polls find an increased number of Americans favoring more restrictions, but there were indications that the proponents of gun control were more intent than in the past. For the first time ever, national polls were finding significant numbers of respondents volunteering in open-ended questions that gun control was the top issue facing the country.Gun control looked like a tailor-made issue that Al Gore and the Democrats could hit out of the park. In post-Columbine America, George W. Bush seemed very vulnerable, having signed a conceal-and-carry law in Texas, and having been identified by the unpopular National Rifle Association as being a potentially ''friendly'' president.Yet, that's not what the polls are showing. Most surveys have found about equal levels of confidence in the two candidates on gun control. And a recent Gallup poll even found a 43 percent to 37 percent plurality thinking Mr. Bush would do the better job on this issue. Two factors account for this unexpected result.First and most important is that while most people want more controls, it is easy to overlook concern about gun owner rights. Yes, with regard to handguns 9 in 10 favor mandatory waiting times for background checks, 89 percent would require childproof safety locks on new weapons and 75 percent favor registration. But the public is more divided on registering rifles and other long guns, is split on laws that would ban concealed weapons, and opposes an outright prohibition on handguns.So while most Americans want stricter laws, many Americans hold moderate or mixed views. Recent polls also find some backlash against calls for controls. A number of polls have also found majorities agreeing with the N.R.A. position that better enforcement of existing laws is more important than new laws.Politically, voters who take a strong pro-control position overwhelmingly favor Mr. Gore on this issue, while those who hold the opposite point of view think Mr. Bush best represents them. But voters with a mixed or moderate position tend to have more confidence in Mr. Bush than in Mr. Gore, according to Pew Research Center surveys. The judgments of the ''moderates'' at this point probably have less to do with knowledge of what the candidates believe about specific controls and rest more on hunches about them personally.A second component of this is gender, one of the most important prisms in this campaign, especially when it comes to guns. Men have more confidence in Mr. Bush and women more faith in Mr. Gore to represent their views.How, and if, the issue affects voter decisions will hinge on the outcome of the campaigns for and against gun control. Can the likes of a million moms do what the N.R.A. has done for years -- mold single-issue voters?  Can Mr. Bush hold the middle on this issue while hanging onto the Second Amendment advocates? Can Mr. Gore effectively draw in more female supporters who favor controls without further alienating men who have less commitment to this cause?Andrew Kohut is the director of the Pew Research Center for People and the Press.
THE REPUBLICANSMcCAIN RESPONDS TO SUPPORTERS ABOUT BUSH -- Supporters of Senator John McCain of Arizona are inundating him with hundreds of e-mail messages and telephone calls complaining about his endorsement of Gov. George W. Bush of Texas. He has responded with an e-mail message of his own, sent to 120,000 supporters on his campaign list, that recalled that he had promised at the start of his campaign to support the eventual Republican nominee and that he always makes good on his promises. In any event, the message continued, Mr. Bush is now ''our best hope'' to oust the Democrats from the White House. ''To those who I have disappointed,'' Mr. McCain wrote, ''let me simply reiterate that I will never give up my fight for real government reform.'' He and the Texas governor, he said, still have ''a few principled disagreements,'' but he did not elaborate. McCain aides said the senator expected complaints about his endorsement but went ahead because breaking a promise would not only have tarnished his straight-talking image but also have made him appear a poor loser and a less-than-faithful Republican, should he ever seek the presidency again.(NYT)THE REPUBLICANSMcCAIN RESPONDS TO SUPPORTERS ABOUT BUSH -- Supporters of Senator John McCain of Arizona are inundating him with hundreds of e-mail messages and telephone calls complaining about his endorsement of Gov. George W. Bush of Texas. He has responded with an e-mail message of his own, sent to 120,000 supporters on his campaign list, that recalled that he had promised at the start of his campaign to support the eventual Republican nominee and that he always makes good on his promises. In any event, the message continued, Mr. Bush is now ''our best hope'' to oust the Democrats from the White House. ''To those who I have disappointed,'' Mr. McCain wrote, ''let me simply reiterate that I will never give up my fight for real government reform.'' He and the Texas governor, he said, still have ''a few principled disagreements,'' but he did not elaborate. McCain aides said the senator expected complaints about his endorsement but went ahead because breaking a promise would not only have tarnished his straight-talking image but also have made him appear a poor loser and a less-than-faithful Republican, should he ever seek the presidency again.(NYT)BUSH COMMENTS ON 2 POSSIBLE RUNNING MATES -- When Gov. George W. Bush of Texas was asked about vice-presidential candidates in an interview with the Lifetime women's cable channel yesterday, he had notably different reactions to two names, suggesting that he was concerned about appearing too open to the idea of a running mate who strongly supports abortion rights. Asked if Elizabeth Dole, an opponent of abortion, was on his list, he said that she was and then praised her as ''a good friend of mine who has had a great career.'' But when asked about Gov. Christine Todd Whitman of New Jersey, who supports abortion rights and whose selection would undoubtedly provoke many religious conservatives, Mr. Bush's response seemed conspicuously restrained. ''There's a lot of people on the list,'' he said.Frank Bruni (NYT)THE POLLSANOTHER SURVEY SHOWS A STRONG BUSH LEAD -- For the second time this week, a national presidential preference poll has Gov. George W. Bush leading Vice President Al Gore by at least half a dozen percentage points. The newest survey, released yesterday by the Voter.com group, puts Mr. Bush ahead by 48 percent to 42 percent. A poll released on Wednesday by The Los Angeles Times had Mr. Bush ahead by eight percentage points. Like the Times poll, the Voter.com poll found Mr. Bush now pulling about as much of the female vote as Mr. Gore, though that voting segment has traditionally leaned heavily to Democrats. Mr. Bush continues to lead among men, and he has moved ahead in the struggle for independents, a toss-up earlier. The Voter.com poll also found Mr. Bush leading among Democrats who had supported Ronald Reagan and also found that half of all voters had grown pessimistic about the state of the nation and its direction, despite the strong economy. Asked to rank top issues for Congress, voters most often mentioned ''restoring moral values,'' followed by education. They said Republicans would be best at restoring moral values -- 6 in 10 disapproved of President Clinton ''as a person'' -- but believed Democrats would do more for education. The poll surveyed 1,000 likely voters from May 1 to May 3 and had a margin of sampling error of plus or minus three percentage points.(NYT)THE DEMOCRATSGORE MAKES MOST OF WASHINGTON CONNECTIONS -- Many are the perks of being vice president, particularly when you are running for president. Al Gore demonstrated that anew this week, first by handing out what his office called ''deliverables'' -- more than $25 million in grants to expand tourism and businesses in the financially struggling Mississippi Delta -- and then by announcing ''improvements'' in veterans' education benefits worth $1.2 billion over five years. (Never mind that the money will come from savings in other veterans' programs.) Mr. Gore boasted that the improvements were ''the single largest increase in veterans' education benefits'' in more than 15 years. Gov. George W. Bush called Mr. Gore hypocritical because the Clinton administration had earlier proposed sharp cuts in veterans' benefits.Katharine Q. Seelye (NYT)
INTERNATIONALA3-15Companies Offer Price Cut For AIDS Drugs in Africa  Five pharmaceutical companies are willing to negotiate steep cuts in the prices they charge for AIDS drugs in Africa and other poor regions hard-hit by the disease, the World Health Organization said in Geneva. Major Western drug companies have been under growing international pressure to make their therapies more accessible in poor areas that are grappling with the epidemic.A1Sierra Leone Rebels Halted  Forces backing the government -- a coalition of United Nations peacekeepers, Sierra Leone soldiers and a militia known as Kamajors -- appeared to push back rebels advancing on the capital, Freetown, as fighting intensified and spread.A14INTERNATIONALA3-15Companies Offer Price Cut For AIDS Drugs in Africa  Five pharmaceutical companies are willing to negotiate steep cuts in the prices they charge for AIDS drugs in Africa and other poor regions hard-hit by the disease, the World Health Organization said in Geneva. Major Western drug companies have been under growing international pressure to make their therapies more accessible in poor areas that are grappling with the epidemic.A1Sierra Leone Rebels Halted  Forces backing the government -- a coalition of United Nations peacekeepers, Sierra Leone soldiers and a militia known as Kamajors -- appeared to push back rebels advancing on the capital, Freetown, as fighting intensified and spread.A14President Clinton said he was sending the Rev. Jesse Jackson to the region to see if he could help negotiate a halt to the violence.A14Senate Passes a Trade Bill  The Senate approved legislation to promote commerce with Africa and the Caribbean, ending more than five years of defeats on trade bills for the administration. The 77-to-19 vote underscored unusual bipartisan support for a compromise measure. The legislation goes to President Clinton, who is expected to sign it.A14Russian Raid on Media Empire  Government agents wielding guns and wearing black masks staged a raid on the downtown headquarters of Russia's largest private media empire, Media-MOST, raising concern among politicians and journalists about prospects for an independent press under President Vladimir V. Putin.A12Russian Convoy Is Ambushed  Islamic rebels mounted a major attack outside Chechnya's borders for the first time in nearly nine months, killing 18 of 22 Russian soldiers in a convoy as it moved down a mountain road in the Caucasus foothills in midmorning. Three soldiers were wounded and one was missing.A12Union Warns Gore on China  George Becker, president of the United Steelworkers of America, said organized labor's support for Vice President Al Gore could be hurt by his recent lobbying for the China trade legislation.A6World BriefingA8OBITUARIESC31NATIONALA16-32New Mexico Fire Prompts Evacuations and Questions  A wildfire forced the evacuation of as many as 25,000 people and destroyed at least 260 homes, but apparently caused no serious damage at the Los Alamos National Laboratory, where nuclear weapons are designed. The fire was started by the Park Service to clear underbrush, and a superintendent was placed on administrative leave, pending an inquiry.A1Hearing in Cuban Boy's Case  Three judges on a federal appeals court in Atlanta heard arguments on whether immigration officials should hold an asylum hearing for Elian Gonzalez. The judges indicated their decision would take weeks.A16Public Lands Bill Passes  The House easily approved a measure that set aside $45 billion over 15 years to buy parks and open spaces, pay for wildlife protection and restore damaged coastal areas.A16Quotas and Skilled Immigrants  President Clinton proposed an increase of more than 85 percent in the number of skilled foreign workers who could be admitted to the United States to fill high-tech jobs.A16Survey on Gun Issues  Overall support for restrictions on guns has declined in the last two months, mostly because men have grown increasingly sympathetic toward the rights of gun owners.A30Maine Acts to Curb Drug Prices  The Legislature gave final passage to a bill that makes Maine the first state to threaten the pharmaceutical industry with price controls, and in the meantime effectively turns the state into a giant drug-price negotiator for about half its people.A30Gay Unions and Clergy Rejected  United Methodist leaders affirmed their opposition to ordination of active homosexuals and to the blessing of same-sex unions. They also voted to uphold a church doctrine that ''the practice of homosexuality is incompatible with Christian teaching.''A22SPORTSD1-8Auction House Cancels Sale  Leland's voided the $551,841 sale of a basketball offered as the one Wilt Chamberlain used to score his 100th point in a 1962 game. Officials cited challenges to its authenticity.D3NEW YORK/REGIONB1-14Giuliani Wards Off Queries On Senate and Private Life  Mayor Giuliani said he had not yet decided if he would stay in the Senate race and brushed aside questions about whether he had had an affair with a former aide, as the mayor's wife suggested on Wednesday.The former aide, Cristyne Lategano-Nicholas, said she never had a sexual relationship with Mr. Giuliani.B5Mr. Giuliani's difficulties have led Hillary Rodham Clinton's campaign to shift to a low-key strategy.B1O'Connor's Successor Named  The Vatican said Bishop Edward Michael Egan, 68, of Bridgeport, Conn., would be archbishop of New York.A1New Jersey Senate Debate  Former Gov. Jim Florio put Jon S. Corzine on the defensive for a full hour as the two Democrats went head-to-head for the first time.B1WEEKENDE1-28; E29-48SCIENCE/HEALTHEarly Emigrants From Africa  Scientists digging in the republic of Georgia found 1.7-million-year-old human skulls bearing signs of African ancestry, perhaps representing the species that first left Africa.A1Report on Malathion  An E.P.A. analysis found ''suggestive evidence'' that the insecticide, sprayed in New York City last year to kill disease-carrying mosquitoes, could cause cancer in lab animals, but no evidence that it posed a threat to people when used properly.B1Findings on Air Pollution  A federal environmental report showed that power plants and other industries had emitted far more toxic chemicals into their surroundings than previously documented.A32Auto Emissions Model Disputed  The E.P.A.'s computer model for predicting how much air pollution comes from cars and trucks underestimates emissions, the National Academy of Sciences said.A19New Editor of Medical Journal  Dr. Jeffrey M. Drazen, a leading asthma researcher at Harvard with strong ties to the drug industry, was named editor of The New England Journal of Medicine.A20BUSINESS DAYC1-20Conceding S.U.V. Drawbacks  Ford acknowledged that sport utility vehicles contributed more than cars to global warming, emitted more smog-causing pollution and endangered other motorists. But Ford said it would keep building them because they were so profitable, though it would try to seek technological solutions to the problems and look for alternatives to the big vehicles.A1Shake-Up Atop Xerox  Xerox, which has been besieged by competition and a battered stock price, ousted its chief executive, G. Richard Thoman; Chairman Paul A. Allaire will assume Mr. Thoman's duties for now. Xerox also named Anne M. Mulcahy, head of its General Markets Organization, as president and chief operating officer.C1A Near-Admission in Manila  A 23-year-old computer student, Onel de Guzman, all but admitted that he had created the program that crippled e-mail systems.C1Fraud Suspect Defends Actions  Martin R. Frankel, accused of masterminding a huge American insurance fraud, said in an interview in a German jail that he had really been trying to feed the world's hungry.C1Stocks Advance Broadly  The Dow rose 1.7 percent, the Nasdaq jumped 3.4 percent and the S.& P. 500 climbed 1.8 percent.C8Business DigestC1EDITORIALA34-35Editorials: New York's harmful drug laws; the war in Sierra Leone; harassment in the senior ranks; computer-generated havoc.  Columns: Gail Collins, Thomas L. Friedman.CrosswordE43  TV ListingsE27  Public LivesB2  WeatherD8
In pointed questions to lawyers for both sides in the battle over the future of Elian Gonzalez, three federal judges wondered today how a 6-year-old who cannot even sign his full name could apply for political asylum but questioned whether sending him back to communist Cuba was in his best interests, regardless of his father's fitness as a parent.Judge J. L. Edmondson, a conservative judge appointed to the United States Court of Appeals for the 11th Circuit by President Ronald Reagan, noted that it was not uncommon for courts to rule that a child's best interests override the rights of a parent, as in the case of parents who refuse their child a doctor's care because of their religious beliefs.In pointed questions to lawyers for both sides in the battle over the future of Elian Gonzalez, three federal judges wondered today how a 6-year-old who cannot even sign his full name could apply for political asylum but questioned whether sending him back to communist Cuba was in his best interests, regardless of his father's fitness as a parent.Judge J. L. Edmondson, a conservative judge appointed to the United States Court of Appeals for the 11th Circuit by President Ronald Reagan, noted that it was not uncommon for courts to rule that a child's best interests override the rights of a parent, as in the case of parents who refuse their child a doctor's care because of their religious beliefs.Judge Edmondson, who twice referred to Cuba as a ''communist, totalitarian state,'' said it was not that such parents did not believe they were acting in their child's behalf, but that their actions seemed ''so conspicuously in conflict with the needs of the child.''During lulls in the arguments, some 100 protesters outside the courtroom could be heard chanting, ''Free Elian!'' Later, as lawyers for the government and for Elian's father left the courtroom, the protesters shouted, ''Communist!'' over and over. The outbursts, which have been commonplace in Miami for months now, puzzled many in Atlanta as they walked past the protesters.Judge Edmondson, the senior member of the three-judge panel that heard the appeal of a decision by a federal district judge in Miami that, in effect, denied a request by Elian's relatives in that city for a political asylum hearing, said before today's hearing that a decision would probably come in a few weeks.Lawyers for the Immigration and Naturalization Service have repeatedly argued that Elian is simply not old enough to understand the application for political asylum that he signed in a childlike scrawl after it appeared that federal officials were planning to send him back to Cuba to be with his father, Juan Miguel Gonzalez. And, the lawyers for the government argued again today, only the father can speak for his son.This hearing may be the last chance the Miami relatives have of keeping Elian in the United States in defiance of his father's wishes, legal experts said.United States immigration officials and the federal district court in Miami have already rejected the request for any asylum hearing filed on Elian's behalf by his great-uncle Lazaro Gonzalez, who took care of the boy after he was found clinging to an inner tube in the Atlantic. Elian was rescued on Nov. 25 after his mother drowned in an effort to cross from Cuba to Florida.''I'm sure Elian Gonzalez is a very bright and intelligent 6-year-old, but he didn't even have the ability to sign his last name on the asylum petition,'' said Judge Charles R. Wilson, an appointee of President Clinton.The panel, whose third member is Judge Joel F. Dubina, who was appointed by President George Bush and is considered a moderate, has several options, legal experts and lawyers for both sides say. It could rule that immigration officials were correct in denying the boy an asylum hearing based on his age, even though immigration laws guarantee an asylum hearing for ''any alien.''Or it could order immigration officials to give Elian a hearing, even though the boy is now in the legal custody of his father in a secluded federal retreat in Maryland. The reunion followed an armed federal raid on the relatives' home in Miami in the predawn hours of April 22.Or it could ask immigration officials to speak with the boy about his wishes, but not in a formal hearing.If the court rules against the Miami relatives, it could also lift an injunction imposed by the same three judges on April 20 barring Elian from leaving the country. That action would allow father and son to return to Cuba.There is no guarantee that the full court -- there are 12 active judges on the 11th Circuit bench -- or the United States Supreme Court will hear the case if the three-judge panel rules against the Miami family.In an unusual address to the crowded courtroom just minutes before the hearing, Judge Edmondson, not yet dressed in his robe, cautioned lawyers and onlookers that they should not try to draw conclusions from the panel's questions.''It is entirely possible that a judge may make a statement or ask a question that is the exact opposite of what he is thinking, because he may want to see how the lawyers respond to it,'' Judge Edmondson said.But in the hearing, which lasted less than an hour and a half, it seemed at least that lawyers for Lazaro Gonzalez had found a sympathetic ear in Judge Edmondson.He compared the case, in theory, to that of a child who had been rescued from a communist country in the former Soviet Union by a mother who gave her life to deliver him to freedom.Kendall Coffey, a lawyer for the Miami family, said Elian would be paraded around Cuba, more a trophy than a boy growing up in his old life there, and his father would have little to say about the child's life.''There is no parent in Cuba who controls what happens to his or her child,'' Mr. Coffey said, ''and there is no power in this country that can protect this child if he is removed to Cuba.''But Gregory Craig, a lawyer for Juan Miguel Gonzalez, said the boy's father was not being manipulated by the government of President Fidel Castro and was free to ''openly express his feelings and his opinions.''Asked by the panel why it had taken his client five months to come to the United States to seek the return of his son, Mr. Craig said Mr. Gonzalez tried to work through his own government to get Elian returned to him.Judge Wilson seemed skeptical of how Elian could have understood a complicated form requesting an asylum hearing.He also questioned whether, considering the fact that Elian is now in the custody of his father, immigration officials could even accept an application filed by someone who no longer has custody of the child.The question of Elian's request for asylum may be moot if the judges accept the premise that he never filed for asylum, that he only scratched his name on the form because he was told to do so.''It really wasn't Elian who filed an asylum application; it was Lazaro Gonzalez who filed the application for him,'' said Bernard Perlmutter, director of the University of Miami Children and Youth Law Clinic. ''People other than the father were making claims on behalf of the child.''''I would think the court has to be swayed by the paramount interest of the child,'' Mr. Perlmutter said. ''Are the facts in this case sufficient to warrant an intrusion in the father's rights to speak for his son? I don't think there is sufficient evidence that anyone other than Juan Miguel Gonzalez can speak for Elian in this case.''To ultimately win, even if the case does wind up in an asylum hearing, lawyers for the boy's Miami relatives must prove that Elian was being persecuted for political reasons and that he was afraid of that persecution, legal experts said.That, for a 6-year-old boy, would seem unlikely.''There is no objective basis for an independent asylum claim,'' a spokesman for the Justice Department said.
Of all the scuffles in today's acerbic debate between New Jersey's two Democratic candidates for the Senate, no clash was more bitter than the contestants' exchanges over the volatile issue of Social Security.Former Gov. Jim Florio and Jon S. Corzine both tried to appeal to the elderly, who are expected to make up a large segment of the Democrats who vote in the June 6 primary. In their heated remarks about ways to extend the solvency of Social Security, the candidates even disputed whether President Clinton had turned away from his own plan to invest part of the Social Security trust fund in the stock market.Of all the scuffles in today's acerbic debate between New Jersey's two Democratic candidates for the Senate, no clash was more bitter than the contestants' exchanges over the volatile issue of Social Security.Former Gov. Jim Florio and Jon S. Corzine both tried to appeal to the elderly, who are expected to make up a large segment of the Democrats who vote in the June 6 primary. In their heated remarks about ways to extend the solvency of Social Security, the candidates even disputed whether President Clinton had turned away from his own plan to invest part of the Social Security trust fund in the stock market.Mr. Corzine, the former co-chairman of Goldman, Sachs & Company, has embraced Mr. Clinton's proposal to invest 15 percent of the government surplus devoted to Social Security in the stock market and use the proceeds to shore up the government's popular retirement program.Mr. Corzine, whose staff has described the proposal as the ''Clinton-Corzine Social Security plan,'' said the plan would yield greater returns than investing in government bonds, and would ensure the system's viability for future generations.But Mr. Florio called the plan ''a colossally bad idea,'' invoking Franklin D. Roosevelt to warn that it would generate millions of dollars  for Wall Street brokers while placing elderly Americans at the whims of a volatile stock market.''The president and the vice president have clearly and decisively come out and said this is not something that either of them support,'' Mr. Florio said.In fact, Vice President Al Gore has withdrawn his support for the proposal. The president has shelved it, citing a lack of support in Congress. But Mr. Clinton's spokesman said earlier this month that the president still supported the concept.After the debate, advisers to Mr. Florio conceded that his description of Mr. Clinton's position was a bit of a stretch, but said their intent was to emphasize that the president no longer advocated the proposal.Mr. Corzine in turn attacked Mr. Florio's Congressional record on Social Security, saying that Mr. Florio voted against a 1985 bill that would have forced the Treasury Department to restore Social Security assets that the Reagan administration had dipped into to avert a cash crisis.But Mr. Florio insisted that Mr. Corzine's description was a distortion. The bill in question was actually a procedural measure to extend the government's borrowing limits, Mr. Florio said, and the Social Security amendment was simply tacked on to make it appear more palatable.
To the Editor:Gov. George W. Bush's readiness to assume the presidency should indeed be judged on his ''experience'' as Texas governor and as a private-sector executive who has faced a measure of both failure and success (editorial, May 7). You say Texas has a ''weak-governor system,'' but it is Vice President Al Gore and his supporters who unhesitatingly attribute Texas's policies on the environment, capital punishment, gun control and other matters to Mr. Bush.To the Editor:Gov. George W. Bush's readiness to assume the presidency should indeed be judged on his ''experience'' as Texas governor and as a private-sector executive who has faced a measure of both failure and success (editorial, May 7). You say Texas has a ''weak-governor system,'' but it is Vice President Al Gore and his supporters who unhesitatingly attribute Texas's policies on the environment, capital punishment, gun control and other matters to Mr. Bush.As for Mr. Gore, any legislator or federal policy official is acquainted with a range of issues. But beyond casting votes in Congress, he does not appear ever to have occupied a position, public or private, where the ''buck stops.'' Mr. Bush's experience as accountable decision maker, public and private, exceeds that of Mr. Gore, as well as that of Bill Clinton in 1992.LINCOLN P. BLOOMFIELD JR.  Alexandria, Va., May 8, 2000The writer was a deputy assistant secretary of state in 1992-93.
To the Editor:New York State has taken the first steps toward common-sense H.I.V. and hepatitis prevention. The new budget decriminalizes syringe possession and allows people to buy, without a prescription, sterile needles from a pharmacy (news article, May 6). Finally, we are carrying out lessons learned from the decade-long, multimillion-dollar exploration of the relationship between H.I.V. and injected drugs.To the Editor:New York State has taken the first steps toward common-sense H.I.V. and hepatitis prevention. The new budget decriminalizes syringe possession and allows people to buy, without a prescription, sterile needles from a pharmacy (news article, May 6). Finally, we are carrying out lessons learned from the decade-long, multimillion-dollar exploration of the relationship between H.I.V. and injected drugs.Increasing access to clean needles decreases the incidence of blood-borne infection without creating new drug use. Needle exchange and pharmacy sales work. That is why every established medical and scientific body to study the issue -- including the National Academy of Sciences, the American Medical Association and the Clinton and Bush AIDS advisory commissions -- concurs on the efficacy of improved access to sterile syringes.BENJAMIN LINAS, M.D.  New York, May 10, 2000
Vice President Al Gore stepped into two contentious local issues in Oregon today, saying that he would ''work for a quick resolution'' on whether to breach the Snake River dams to protect endangered salmon, and, according to a key Democrat, saying he was opposed to the state's law allowing assisted suicide.Mr. Gore read a statement on the salmon issue that did not hint at his own view.Vice President Al Gore stepped into two contentious local issues in Oregon today, saying that he would ''work for a quick resolution'' on whether to breach the Snake River dams to protect endangered salmon, and, according to a key Democrat, saying he was opposed to the state's law allowing assisted suicide.Mr. Gore read a statement on the salmon issue that did not hint at his own view.In the past Mr. Gore has said that the issue of assisted suicide should be left to the states.But today, Senator Ron Wyden, Democrat of Oregon, said the vice president told him that he opposed assisted suicide. Oregon has passed a law allowing assisted suicide, but Republicans in Congress are trying to overturn it.Senator Wyden met Mr. Gore at the airport here, and they sat together in the back of the vice-presidential limousine on their way to Portland Community College, where Mr. Gore was giving a speech on Social Security.''He talked to me in the limousine,'' Mr. Wyden told reporters later. ''He said he's against assisted suicide'' but that he did not want to interfere with the ability of doctors to manage a patient's pain.Mr. Gore was not available to reporters to clarify his views.Last month, the vice president was asked in a satellite interview with an Oregon television station whether he supported Oregon's law.''That's an example of an issue that should be left to the states,'' Mr. Gore said on April 20. ''I think that states should have the discretion to explore this new set of issues involving what role doctors should play when a patient is in extremis at the end of life. You know, any family that's been in that kind of situation knows that doctors sometimes have experience that could be brought to bear usefully. You know, there are so many different situations, I think that states ought to deal with that on their own.''Local Democrats have been urging Mr. Gore to take a leadership role on some of these polarizing local matters. He was greeted today by a front-page article in The Oregonian in which the governor, John Kitzhaber, who supported Mr. Gore's opponent, former Senator Bill Bradley, in the Democratic presidential primaries, said he did not understand why Mr. Gore had not spoken out on the salmon issue.''What baffles me is his continued silence on this issue,'' the article quoted Mr. Kitzhaber as saying.The article also said Gore advisers were insistent that the vice president would not speak out on the matter because he wanted to focus attention on Social Security.The salmon issue revolves around the question of whether to breach dams on the Snake River as a way of helping to preserve endangered species of salmon. The Army Corps of Engineers is studying whether to proposed such a measure, which is strongly opposed by many people as an assault on the area's agricultural economy.Before his speech on Social Security, Mr. Gore read a statement about salmon, criticizing his Republican opponent's position on the issue, but saying that his own mind was not made up.''Unfortunately, Gov. George W. Bush has prejudged the outcome,'' Mr. Gore said in the statement he read to about 200 people, referring to Mr. Bush's statement last year that he would oppose any effort to breach the dams.''I feel it is irresponsible to make a decision or draw a conclusion without consulting all of the parties involved and without utilizing hard science,'' Mr. Gore said.''I pledge to work for a quick resolution that would involve all of the affected parties based on hard science, and I refuse to prejudge or play politics with this issue. We can develop a plan that can both protect the rivers and restore the salmon runs. Extinction here is not an option.''Bob Applegate, a spokesman for Governor Kitzhaber, said he believed that the statement was ''extremely helpful'' and he praised Mr. Gore for suggesting he would take a leadership role in helping to resolve the matter.''Right now we have utter gridlock, the kind that only a president can break,'' Mr. Applegate said.Oregon, which has voted Democratic recently, has been less hospitable to Mr. Gore than it has been to President Clinton. Recent polls here show Mr. Bush with a slight edge.THE 2000 CAMPAIGN: THE VICE PRESIDENT
George W. Bush announced today that he would spend $1 million a year as governor of Texas to provide free trigger locks for handgun owners in the state and would push for a similar national initiative, at a cost of $65 million a year, if he was elected president.Although Mr. Bush had not previously demonstrated much enthusiasm for a government role in promoting trigger locks and had stressed that they were not a panacea for gun violence, he presented his new approach as a way ''to be common-sensical about how we deal with gun safety.''George W. Bush announced today that he would spend $1 million a year as governor of Texas to provide free trigger locks for handgun owners in the state and would push for a similar national initiative, at a cost of $65 million a year, if he was elected president.Although Mr. Bush had not previously demonstrated much enthusiasm for a government role in promoting trigger locks and had stressed that they were not a panacea for gun violence, he presented his new approach as a way ''to be common-sensical about how we deal with gun safety.''He also conceded that his announcement was being made with an eye toward the Million Mom March in Washington, where women from around the country gather this weekend to call for stricter gun control.''Like them, I'm concerned about gun violence in our society,'' Mr. Bush said this morning in an appearance on the NBC News television program ''Today.'' The appearance was sought and arranged by his aides with the knowledge that President Clinton would be talking about gun control today on ''Good Morning America,'' on ABC.For his part, Mr. Clinton announced today that the Justice Department would award grants of $300,000 each to two gun makers -- Smith & Wesson and F. N. Manufacturing -- to help them develop ''smart guns'' that only the weapons' owners would be able to fire.Mr. Clinton made his announcement in Ohio, where he told a group of women in North Canton that gun control proponents would prevail because ''the evidence is on their side, the human element is on their side.''''All they're trying to do,'' he said, ''is to protect our society from criminal acts and from avoidable accidents.''The president used his appearance on ''Good Morning America'' to express skepticism about Mr. Bush's announcement, and reiterated assertions by himself and Vice President Al Gore that the governor is a longtime friend of the National Rifle Association who is merely engaging in  a political makeover.''You have to understand what's going on here,'' Mr. Clinton said. ''There was a report in the newspaper last week that a lobbyist from the N.R.A. said they would have an office in the White House if Governor Bush was elected.''Mr. Clinton was referring to a snippet of videotape, released as a television commercial by the advocacy group Handgun Control, in which Kayne Robinson, the N.R.A.'s first vice president and also Iowa Republican chairman, made that boast in a closed meeting with other members of the association in February. Mr. Bush has dismissed Mr. Robinson's remark as untrue, and did so again today.The dueling comments by Mr. Bush and Mr. Clinton were among the many competing messages today as the Million Mom March approached. Television news programs were crowded with appeals from advocates on both sides of the issue.Mr. Bush's announcement about trigger locks marked the latest step in a striking evolution of his position on them. It also suggested an awareness of gun control's potential as a potent issue in the 2000 elections and a concern with Mr. Gore's ability to portray the governor as an opponent of sensible restrictions on firearms.Mr. Gore and his aides consistently draw attention to certain aspects of Mr. Bush's record on guns, most notably a 1995 law permitting Texans with proper training and licenses to carry concealed handguns. Mr. Bush also signed into law last year a measure making it extremely difficult for Texas cities and counties to sue gun manufacturers, and he has indicated support for similar legislation on the federal level.As for weapons and child safety, Mr. Bush did support a 1995 Texas law that held parents criminally liable if their firearms ended up in the hands of children and caused injury as a result. But as recently as last year, he said he opposed the mandatory sale of trigger locks or other child safety devices with handguns and supported voluntary measures instead.In early March, however, he said that if he became president and a mandatory measure reached his desk, he would sign it, although even then he emphasized the difficulty of getting people to adhere to it. ''Are we going to have trigger-lock police knocking on people's door?'' he  asked during a Republican presidential debate.Mr. Bush's aides said today that his plan to distribute free trigger locks was consistent with his belief that it would be most effective and plausible to encourage voluntary use of them. The Texas program, in which gun owners will be able to obtain the locks at local police and fire stations, is to be financed by $5 million over five years in discretionary spending by the governor.And Mr. Bush proposed that the federal government make $325 million in matching funds available over five years for state and local governments that adopt similar programs.Gun control advocates said the governor's announcement reflected a sudden change in the level of attention he paid to child safety devices. ''It couldn't be a more crass political move,'' said Joe Sudbay, political director of Handgun Control.Although the drumbeat for enhanced gun control has grown louder and Mr. Gore supports a wider array of new measures than Mr. Bush, it is unclear who holds the political advantage. Several public opinion polls in recent months suggested that more Americans trusted Mr. Bush to handle the issue correctly than trusted Mr. Gore.But a new ABC News poll, conducted just after the N.R.A. official's comments about a Bush White House became public last week, showed Mr. Gore with an edge, 46 percent to 38 percent. That telephone survey, of 1,068 adults interviewed from Sunday though Wednesday, had a margin of sampling error of plus or minus three percentage points.THE 2000 CAMPAIGN: THE GUN ISSUE
Flare-Up in Horn of Africa  Diplomats said a new outbreak in fighting on the disputed Ethiopian-Eritrean border was a push by Ethiopia to end a war that has worsened severe food shortages and claimed thousands of lives.PAGE A8Flare-Up in Horn of Africa  Diplomats said a new outbreak in fighting on the disputed Ethiopian-Eritrean border was a push by Ethiopia to end a war that has worsened severe food shortages and claimed thousands of lives.PAGE A8Colombian Leader's Woes  President Andres Pastrana of Colombia has had his hands full trying to fend off both guerrillas and drug traffickers. Now a deepening political crisis is threatening to weaken his authority even further.PAGE A3Primary Overhaul Endorsed  Republican Party leaders endorsed a plan to prevent future presidential primary contests from being decided as early as this year's race between Senator John McCain and Gov. George W. Bush.PAGE A12
THE DEMOCRATSGORE LEADS CASH PARADE -- Vice President Al Gore continues to pull in the cash for his party. This week he raised $2.4 million for the Democratic National Committee at six dinners. That brings the total that he has raised for the party since the end of March to $15.8 million, not including the $5 million he helped raise with President Clinton in Hollywood ($2.8 million) and New York ($2.2 million). The events this week included two dinners each, back to back, in Manhattan, Dallas and Los Angeles. Next up is a fund-raiser for the party on May 24 in Washington, where the host, Terry McAuliffe, has promised a record-breaking single-night haul of more than $21 million.Katherine Q. Seelye (NYT)THE DEMOCRATSGORE LEADS CASH PARADE -- Vice President Al Gore continues to pull in the cash for his party. This week he raised $2.4 million for the Democratic National Committee at six dinners. That brings the total that he has raised for the party since the end of March to $15.8 million, not including the $5 million he helped raise with President Clinton in Hollywood ($2.8 million) and New York ($2.2 million). The events this week included two dinners each, back to back, in Manhattan, Dallas and Los Angeles. Next up is a fund-raiser for the party on May 24 in Washington, where the host, Terry McAuliffe, has promised a record-breaking single-night haul of more than $21 million.Katherine Q. Seelye (NYT)THE REPUBLICANSBUSH HONING FOREIGN POLICY SKILLS -- Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, ever eager to burnish his foreign policy credentials in the presidential campaign, plans to attend a conference of American and Mexican governors from border states next month in Sacramento. The event is being organized by Gov. Gray Davis of California, a Democrat who is an ally of Vice President Al Gore, Mr. Bush's expected rival in the presidential race. Governors Bush, Gray and Jane Dee Hull, an Arizona Republican, will meet on June 1 and June 2 with their counterparts from six Mexican border states. A spokeswoman for Mr. Bush, Mindy Tucker, said yesterday that the agenda included education, economic development and the environment. Last month, Mr. Bush met with President Ernesto Zedillo of Mexico at the dedication of the eight-lane, $128 million World Trade Bridge in Nuevo Laredo, just over the border from Texas.(AP)THE STATESA KENNEDY DEFENDS HIMSELF -- Representative Patrick J. Kennedy met today in Los Angeles with an airport guard who said he had assaulted her. They were there to view a videotape of the incident and to give their versions of events to a hearing officer. Lawrence Webster of the city attorney's office said a decision would be made in about a week on whether to file misdemeanor charges against Mr. Kennedy, a Rhode Island Democrat and rising star of his party. The guard, Della Patton, 58, said Mr. Kennedy shoved and grabbed her on March 26 after she told him his bag was too big to fit through an X-ray scanner at Los Angeles International Airport. Rather than filing a misdemeanor battery charge, which carries a penalty of up to six months in jail and a $2,000 fine, the city attorney's office ordered today's hearing in hope of resolving the case. Mr. Kennedy, 32, the son of Senator Edward M. Kennedy of Massachusetts, has expressed regret for acting rudely, but has denied hurting the woman. Ms. Patton's lawyer, George L. Mallory Jr., said his client ''desires to go forward with a criminal case.'' In a statement after the hearing, Mr. Kennedy said ''there is absolutely no question'' that the accusations were inaccurate.(AP)THE 2000 CAMPAIGN
The Republican Party leadership moved today to prevent an early conclusion to the presidential nominating process, recommending a system in which the smallest states would hold their primaries in February while the biggest states would have to wait until May.Jim Nicholson, the chairman of the Republican National Committee, praised the 36-to-13 vote by its Rules Committee, saying the move would ''make the presidential primary process more meaningful for more citizens'' than the ''media-driven, front-loaded campaign process that disenfranchises so many states and so many voters.''The Republican Party leadership moved today to prevent an early conclusion to the presidential nominating process, recommending a system in which the smallest states would hold their primaries in February while the biggest states would have to wait until May.Jim Nicholson, the chairman of the Republican National Committee, praised the 36-to-13 vote by its Rules Committee, saying the move would ''make the presidential primary process more meaningful for more citizens'' than the ''media-driven, front-loaded campaign process that disenfranchises so many states and so many voters.''Former Senator Bill Brock of Tennessee, who led a commission that devised the plan voted on today, said it was an opportunity ''to restore a sense of participation'' in politics.Morton Blackwell, a conservative from Virginia and member of the Rules Committee who usually opposes telling state parties what to do, said the plan ''is the only alternative that we have to a national primary that would be bad for our country and bad for our party.''The committee approved one change in the Brock plan, moving its March-through-June schedule of primaries to a February-through-May schedule.The revised plan, which the committee may still tinker with to build support, must next be approved by the national committee and then by the Republican National Convention in Philadelphia this summer. The first test may be easier; in the full national committee, as in its Rules Committee today, states have equal voting strength regardless of their populations.In the convention, populous states have more votes. But today's vote suggested that they might not have enough to defeat the plan. The states in opposition today will have 35 percent of the delegates in Philadelphia.Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, the prospective presidential nominee, could probably ensure either victory or defeat for the plan at the national convention. But Karl Rove, Mr. Bush's chief political strategist, said on Thursday that the governor would not take any stand, now or later.If the new plan clears those hurdles, several committee members said today, negotiations could begin with Democrats to agree on a plan that both parties could take to state legislatures, which set actual primary dates.Mike Hellon, a Rules Committee member from Arizona, said ''Democrats hate the system worse than we do'' and would ''probably embrace what we're doing'' eventually.Bill Jones, a committee member who is also the California secretary of state, said, ''The Democrats will come.''The formal position of Vice President Al Gore's presidential campaign, and therefore that of the Democratic Party, is that the current system has brought Democrats victory in 1992 and 1996 and thus needs no change, especially one that might annoy one state party or another.Democrats, who led the efforts to change the nominating system in the 1970's, are now happy to let the Republicans assume that risk first. But, speaking on condition their names not be used, many Democratic operatives have suggested that if Republicans can ultimately agree among themselves, two-party talks are likely after this year's elections.For that to happen, however, a proposal adopted on Thursday to give the national committee the power to change the Republicans' rules between conventions would have to be passed in Philadelphia, and it is sure to draw strong opposition.One important issue the Republicans ducked today was whether to exempt New Hampshire, traditionally the nation's first primary state, from the new rule barring any primaries before the first Tuesday in February. New Hampshire would be allowed to vote then, but its influence would be diluted because so could 11 other states, as well as Puerto Rico, the District of Columbia, Guam, the Virgin Islands and American Samoa.That issue, on which the Rules Committee appeared to be closely divided, was shelved until the committee meets in Philadelphia in July. The panel did decide that Iowa's Republican caucuses could be held in January, concluding that the presidential ''straw poll'' taken at the caucuses did not directly connect to the selection of convention delegates.Democratic rules specifically allow the contests in Iowa and New Hampshire to precede those of all the other states, which are forbidden to vote before March.Today's debate generally assumed that the present system, with states racing to get to the head of the primary line, produced low interest in later primaries. But representatives from most of the populous states that were allotted the later dates contended that even though they had almost half the delegates, the real choice would still be made before their residents got to vote.Mr. Jones of California, who opposed the plan recommended today and preferred a system of regional primaries with a rotating right to go first, insisted that there was more than the calendar at work. He said the parties had a strong incentive to unite behind a candidate early and start fighting the other party.As a concession to that argument and to big states, the committee changed the dates in the Brock plan.Jan Staples of Maine, a lightly populated state that could vote in February, scoffed at the argument that late primaries would cost the big states influence.''The large states simply have too many delegates and too many electoral votes in the general election to become irrelevant,'' Ms. Staples said.William Powers, the Republican state chairman in New York, opposed the plan and tried to make its adoption conditional on Democratic agreement.''We can't tie our hands while theirs are free to choke us,'' Mr. Powers said.But David Norcross of New Jersey scorned that idea, saying, ''It cedes to the Democrats leadership on this issue.''John Mason of Nevada even argued that the more drawn-out schedule would lead to nicer campaigns. Knowing that the process this year would effectively be over by March 7, Mr. Mason said, Mr. Bush and his main rival, Senator John McCain of Arizona, had an incentive to try for ''a death stroke'' against each other.THE 2000 CAMPAIGN: THE PRIMARIES
It has become conventional wisdom among Democratic strategists that the Million Mom March for gun control on Sunday will be good for Vice President Al Gore in his quest for the presidency. But the conventional wisdom does not apply here in Beaver County.Nestled in the shadows of shuttered steel mills 20 miles northwest of Pittsburgh, Beaver County has been a Democratic bastion since the New Deal. It is also a haven for hunters, Second Amendment devotees and the National Rifle Association, Mr. Gore's sworn enemy.It has become conventional wisdom among Democratic strategists that the Million Mom March for gun control on Sunday will be good for Vice President Al Gore in his quest for the presidency. But the conventional wisdom does not apply here in Beaver County.Nestled in the shadows of shuttered steel mills 20 miles northwest of Pittsburgh, Beaver County has been a Democratic bastion since the New Deal. It is also a haven for hunters, Second Amendment devotees and the National Rifle Association, Mr. Gore's sworn enemy.So when Mr. Gore stumps for gun control, as he often does these days, many Democrats here, particularly men, squirm. To them, the issue is a divisive headache that drives their friends and neighbors into the arms of Mr. Gore's presumed Republican rival, Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, a frequent critic of gun control.''I get so frustrated when I hear Al Gore talk about gun control,'' said Jim Rooker, a 57-year-old former pitcher for the Pittsburgh Pirates who now owns a tavern in Beaver County and is active in the local Democratic Party. ''There isn't any question that he'll lose votes here if he keeps it up.''For Mr. Gore, winning this fall will almost certainly require keeping places like Beaver County solidly in the Democratic column, political analysts say. But therein lies the risk of gun control: While the issue plays well among suburban women, it infuriates many men in places like western Pennsylvania. Mr. Gore already trails Mr. Bush among men by double-digit margins, recent polls show.''To gun owners, he's already viewed as an extremist,'' said Representative Bart Stupak, a Democrat from Michigan who, for most of his five terms, has been an opponent of gun control. ''If he wants to talk about safety measures, that's O.K. People see that as reasonable. If you talk about further layers, he'll lose voters in a minute. They're not comfortable with his position as it is.''But to the chagrin of Democrats like Mr. Stupak, Mr. Gore supports gun control proposals that go well beyond simple safety measures like trigger locks. He would require states to create photo licenses for buyers of new handguns. He would ban the cheap handguns known as Saturday Night Specials and limit handgun purchases to one a month. He supports lawsuits by counties and cities against gun makers. And he accuses Mr. Bush of being a pawn of the rifle association.Mr. Bush, by contrast, contends that the federal government should enforce existing gun laws rather than enact new ones, a basic tenet of the N.R.A. As governor, he signed legislation that allows people to carry concealed weapons into churches, among other places, and that prohibits municipalities from directly suing gun makers. Recently, he suggested that he would also sign anti-lawsuit legislation as president.[Mr. Bush announced yesterday that he would spend $1 million a year to provide free trigger locks for handgun owners in Texas and would push for a similar national initiative.]''Bush is in the safety zone on guns for Pennsylvania voters,'' said G. Terry Madonna, director of the Keystone Poll at Millersville University in Pennsylvania. ''I think supporting lawsuits against manufacturers is problematic for Gore in Pennsylvania because it raises the prospect that guns could be outlawed.''What further complicates the issue for Mr. Gore is that there are many places like Beaver County in the necklace of northern states that Democratic strategists say he needs to win, including Pennsylvania, Ohio, Illinois and Michigan. In recent visits to those states, he has tended to avoid mentioning his positions on gun control.Mr. Gore and Bill Clinton won those states in 1992, when the economy dwarfed all other issues, and in 1996, when the race was a rout. But this year's contest is expected to be close, meaning gun control could emerge as a significant factor. And history has shown the N.R.A. to be better at mobilizing its voters than gun control proponents have been at energizing theirs.Unlike Mr. Gore, Mr. Bush has said little on gun control except when pressed by reporters, apparently concerned that the issue poses risks for him, as well. Clearly, gun control is widely supported not only in Democratic cities but also many Republican suburbs. And it is popular in California, the largest state, and New Jersey, an important swing state.But the greatest risk for Mr. Bush on gun control is among women. Most polls show that women, by significantly higher margins than men, favor gun control and distrust the N.R.A. The higher the income and education level, the more supportive women are of restrictions on guns.''The arithmetic on guns works out in Gore's favor,'' says Geoffrey Garin, a Democratic pollster. ''The pro-gun vote is primarily made up of white men who vote Republican on a pretty routine basis. The voters who are more in play tend to be suburban women who vote Republican in some cases, but who get driven away from Republican candidates on the basis of gun control.''Even in western Pennsylvania, there are clear sex differences on gun control. In recent interviews in the Pittsburgh area, more women than men said they supported gun control and had low opinions of the N.R.A. Those sex differences cut across party lines.Sandra Miller describes herself as a lapsed Democrat who votes increasingly Republican. A resident of one of Pittsburgh's affluent suburbs, Ms. Miller dislikes Mr. Gore, calling him ''a real politician who turns whichever way the wind blows.''But Ms. Miller, 56, who grew up in a Texas household surrounded by hunting rifles, thinks it is time to put tough restrictions on gun owners. ''I don't want to take anyone's gun away, but that Second Amendment was written a long time ago,'' she said. The N.R.A., she added, ''scares me.''''They are too powerful,'' she said. Asked if she might vote against a politician, including Mr. Bush, based solely on his gun control record, she said, ''Yes.''It is because of women like Sandra Miller that Democratic strategists think the Million Mom March will be so useful for Mr. Gore. By emphasizing motherhood, the event will unite women from both parties behind the Democratic agenda without evoking partisan politics, the strategists say.More important, gun control advocates say, the march will demonstrate that supporters of gun restrictions are becoming as powerful a political movement as the opponents. Mass shootings at Columbine and elsewhere, including two in the Pittsburgh area in the last two months,  have changed that dynamic, gun control advocates assert.''There are far more people who care about the issue today,'' said Joe Sudbay, political director for Handgun Control Inc., which advocates stronger regulations on firearms. ''For the first time, people on our side are making it a voting issue.''The elections will test that theory, and western Pennsylvania is likely to be one of the proving grounds.In rural Beaver County, even supporters of gun control speak reverently about Second Amendment protections of the right to bear arms. Representative Ron Klink, a four-term Pennsylvania Democrat who is running for Senate this year, has been consistently anti-gun control in Congress. State Representative Terry Van Horne, the Democrat who wants to replace him, has endorsed only modest gun-control measures, like mandatory trigger locks.But even that position has caused Mr. Van Horne's Republican opponent, State Senator Melissa Hart, to assert that he is ''out of the mainstream'' on guns. Ms. Hart has been endorsed by the N.R.A., which views the district as an important opportunity to protect the Republicans' slim majority in the House.''Gun rights and the Second Amendment are swing issues for voters in western Pennsylvania,'' said John Lee, director of legislative affairs for the Pennsylvania Rifle and Pistol Association, the N.R.A.'s state affiliate. ''We're more 'no compromise' here.''There are, of course, some Democrats in Beaver County who support Mr. Gore's gun control positions and do not worry that the issue will drag him down. ''The big issues are Medicare and Social Security,'' said Robert Standish, 61, a debt consultant and local Democratic activist.Indeed, chances are good that Mr. Gore will carry Beaver County. But the question is whether he can win it with enough votes to offset Mr. Bush's gains in less Democratic districts. Gun control is likely to be a factor in determining that level of enthusiasm.Take Dominic DeMarco, a 65-year-old retiree from the Beaver Falls area. Mr. DeMarco is a fan of President Clinton, and thinks Mr. Gore should be given the chance to continue current policies. But do not get him started on gun control.''The government is to blame for not keeping criminals in prison,'' he says angrily. ''The last thing we need are more gun control laws.''
Last summer, there was no more enthusiastic backer of Rudolph Giuliani than Joseph Bruno, the New York State Senate majority leader and upstate Republican. While some Republicans worried about the mayor's card-carrying Republican credentials as a United States Senate candidate, Mr. Bruno's calculation was pragmatic.He believed that Mr. Giuliani would run well in the suburban counties surrounding New York City, and thereby help maintain the Republicans' 36-25 majority in the State Senate.Last summer, there was no more enthusiastic backer of Rudolph Giuliani than Joseph Bruno, the New York State Senate majority leader and upstate Republican. While some Republicans worried about the mayor's card-carrying Republican credentials as a United States Senate candidate, Mr. Bruno's calculation was pragmatic.He believed that Mr. Giuliani would run well in the suburban counties surrounding New York City, and thereby help maintain the Republicans' 36-25 majority in the State Senate.While electing a Republican to fill the seat being vacated by Daniel Patrick Moynihan is the most visible party priority this year, the principal goal of most G.O.P. leaders and officeholders in New York is to maintain secure control of the State Senate. This is not just parochial self-interest. Should Republicans lose control, they would have virtually no voice in the reapportionment next year of the state's congressional districts.With so much at stake, it wasn't surprising that as the mayor's marital difficulties spilled into public view last week, Mr. Bruno led the Republican hierarchy in warning Mr. Giuliani that they could disrupt his campaign.Redistricting is the responsibility of the State Legislature; the governor plays no direct role in drawing up the plan. Democrats are likely to keep control of the New York Assembly, where they have a 2-to-1 advantage, regardless of which party wins the United States Senate seat. But if Republicans lost just six seats in the State Senate, the Democrats would be in the rare position of controlling both houses.This would result in a new set of congressional districts with boundaries that favored Democrats. The New York congressional delegation, which consists of 18 Democrats and 13 Republicans, is likely to lose one seat because of the 2000 census. If the Democrats redrew the boundaries, it is easy to count four fewer Republican seats. Incumbent Republicans would be forced to run where they are not well known, and where their likely opponents would be high-profile Democrats. For example, Representative Vito Fossella, a Republican elected in 1996, might find his safe Staten Island congressional district including a larger Democratic base in southern Brooklyn.The realignment in New York is crucial to national Republicans as well. It is already apparent that both houses of the California Legislature will be in the hands of Democrats, who will be looking to redraw the map to their advantage. It is hard to imagine a more unpleasant turn of events for the national G.O.P. than losing its slim majority in the House in a few years, simply because Democrats controlled the legislatures in the largest and third-largest states.There are 4.9 million Democrats and 3 million Republicans registered to vote in New York State. Republican candidates cannot win if their ideology undermines their appeal to moderate voters. Until recently, Republican leaders hoped that Mr. Giuliani's popularity would overcome George W. Bush's limited appeal in the state.This year, the Republicans are especially vulnerable in Nassau and Westchester counties, where the party machines have broken down. In Westchester, the Democrats control the county executive's office and have recently won seats in local elections, while in Nassau County, the local Republicans are being blamed for fiscal mismanagement and surging deficits.For the Republican leaders, the rationale for the Giuliani candidacy is evaporating. Winning a United States Senate seat would be a luxury, but keeping control of the State Senate is a necessity.Mitchell L. Moss is director of the Taub Urban Research Center at New York University.
INTERNATIONALA3-8U.N. Leader Chides U.S. For Holding Back on Troops  Secretary General Kofi Annan, faced with war on several fronts in Africa, criticized the Clinton administration for a reluctance to put American troops on the ground in United Nations peacekeeping efforts.A1INTERNATIONALA3-8U.N. Leader Chides U.S. For Holding Back on Troops  Secretary General Kofi Annan, faced with war on several fronts in Africa, criticized the Clinton administration for a reluctance to put American troops on the ground in United Nations peacekeeping efforts.A1Three hundred Jordanian peacekeepers arrived in Sierra Leone, and 100 United Nations civilian employees who had been evacuated returned to Freetown, the capital.A8Heavy fighting erupted along the Ethiopia-Eritrea border. Although there have been occasional skirmishes recently, this appeared to be the worst fighting in nearly a year.A8Debate on Kosovo Force  The Pentagon and a bipartisan group of senators criticized legislation setting a deadline for withdrawing Nato-led American peacekeepers.A7Questions on Korea Massacre  New evidence has been published that appears to undermine the testimony of two witnesses who said American soldiers were ordered to kill civilians near the No Gun Ri bridge during the Korean War.A1China Official Dies After Fall  Officials confirmed that China's top foreign exchange regulator, Li Fuxiang, died on Wednesday, after falling from a hospital window. Hong Kong newspapers called the death a suicide.A6Clinton Presses China Trade  President Clinton took his campaign to elevate trade relations with China to the Midwest, arguing that if Congress rejected the measure it would deny troubled farmers a chance to tap a giant new market.A6Pakistan Coup Ruled Legal  The Supreme Court ruled that the coup last October was legal and justified because of corrupt and ineffective rule by Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif, but it set a three-year deadline for a return to civilian rule.A4Russian Police Raid Defended  President Vladimir V. Putin gave a backhanded defense of a police raid on the corporate headquarters of a private media empire, saying, ''All are equal before the law, no matter what business they are in.''A5World BriefingA7NATIONALA9-14, 20Officer in Harassment Case Breaks Her Public Silence  Lieut. Gen. Claudia J. Kennedy, who has accused a fellow Army general of making unwanted sexual advances toward her in 1996, said women in uniform who face harassment need to report it immediately to friends and superiors or ''misconduct will continue to harm us.''A1League Fights Costly Verdict  Lawyers for the Anti-Defamation League filed motions in a federal court in Denver asking a judge to set aside a defamation verdict against it or at least reduce the $10.5 million in damages that the jury awarded a couple who were called anti-Semites by a local league official.A1Suit Against Islamic Charities  The parents of an Israeli-American teenager, David Boim, who died in a 1996 terrorist attack in Jerusalem, sued several Islamic charities, nonprofit groups and individuals that the Boims say raised money in the United States for Hamas, the militant Palestinian group. The Boims, who are seeking $600 million in damages, say the groups are legally responsible for their son's death.A10Respite for New Mexico Fire  Better weather stabilized the fire that destroyed much of Los Alamos and threatened the nation's main weapons laboratory. But high winds were expected this weekend.A9Lottery Winner Steps Forward  A 47-year-old owner of a Michigan swimming pool company claimed half the record $363 million Big Game lottery prize; after taxes, he will pocket about $61 million. Officials in Illinois were still seeking the other winning-ticket holder.A9Recasting G.O.P. Primaries  The Rules Committee of the Republican National Committee voted, 36 to 13, for a new primary system in which the smallest states would hold their contests in February while the biggest states would have to wait until May. The plan must be approved by the full committee and then the national convention this summer.A12Bush to Offer Trigger Locks  Gov. George W. Bush said he would spend $1 million a year to provide free trigger locks for handgun owners in Texas and, if elected president, would push for a national initiative, at a cost of $65 million a year.A12Religion JournalA14NEW YORK/REGIONB1-6Mayor to Devote Weekend To Health and Politics  Advisers said Mayor Giuliani would spend today and tomorrow considering treatment options for his prostate cancer and whether to stay in the Senate race. The mayor said he owed it to Republicans to make his plans known soon, and aides indicated an announcement by midweek.B1Judge Allows Water Plant  A federal judge dismissed three lawsuits against a planned water-filtration plant in Van Cortlandt Park in the Bronx, allowing the city to go forward with a project that has been assailed by community groups and environmentalists.B1Stolen Cyanide Trailer Found  Police officers in Queens found a stolen truck trailer that had held 20 drums of potassium cyanide, a highly poisonous chemical, on a deserted street. The chemical can be used for making bombs, but there was no indication that terrorists were involved in the theft.B3EDUCATIONWay Clear for Interim Chancellor  Harold O. Levy's last two competitors for the chancellor's position dropped out, a day before they were to be interviewed by the New York City Board of Education.B3ARTS & IDEASB7-16Auction Houses Disclose Data  Sotheby's and Christie's have given confidential company information to lawyers representing customers who accuse them of price-fixing in the wake of a federal inquiry. The move was a sign that the houses may be exploring a possible settlement of a potentially vast class-action suit.B13SPORTSD1-8Miami Beats Knicks  The Miami Heat beat the Knicks, 77-76, in overtime. Miami holds a 2-1 lead the NBA Eastern Conference semifinals.D1Scion of Racing Family Is Killed  Adam Petty, 19, a fourth-generation Nascar driver, died after crashing in practice in New Hampshire.D1BUSINESS DAYC1-14Icahn's Nabisco Proposal  Carl C. Icahn said in a regulatory filing that he would pay Nabisco Group shareholders $19 in cash and $3 a share in short-term debt, which Mr. Icahn said he would retire within two years through a refinancing or the sale of Nabisco's assets. Stock analysts called the price fair, given bids for other food companies, but said the bidding could go higher. Nabisco Group closed at $19.69, up $2.13.C1Wholesale Prices Ease  The Producer Price Index, which measures inflation pressures before they reach consumers, dipped 0.3 percent last month, after shooting up in February and March. Nonetheless, economists expect the Fed to push rates higher on Tuesday.C3Stocks Markets Rise Slightly  The Dow gained 63.40 points, to 10,609.37; the Nasdaq rose 29.48 points, to 3,529.06; and the S.& P. 500 climbed 13.15 points, to 1,420.96.C3Ford Closing Dagenham Plant  Ford said it would close its biggest car assembly plant in Britain by early 2002, with a loss of 1,900 jobs. Ford cited poor financial performance in the whole of Europe.C2Business DigestC1OBITUARIESA14-15EDITORIALA18-19Editorials: New York's new archbishop; controlled burning, out of control; insuring a fair vote in Peru; a real New Jersey debate.  Columns: Anthony Lewis.BridgeB15  TV ListingsB16  CrosswordB14  WeatherD8  Public LivesA9
THE YAMATO DYNASTYThe Secret History of Japan's Imperial Family.By Sterling Seagrave and Peggy Seagrave.Illustrated. 394 pp. New York:Broadway Books. $27.50.THE YAMATO DYNASTYThe Secret History of Japan's Imperial Family.By Sterling Seagrave and Peggy Seagrave.Illustrated. 394 pp. New York:Broadway Books. $27.50.For fans of vast right-wing conspiracies, ''The Yamato Dynasty: The Secret History of Japan's Imperial Family'' posits a doozy: Over the last 150 years, four Japanese emperors, and assorted princes and consorts, have been so fiendishly wrapped around the fingers of a cabal of sinister power brokers, financiers and politicians as to make the Chrysanthemum Throne little more than a front for greed, corruption and fraud. That, say Sterling and Peggy Seagrave, the authors of ''Dragon Lady: The Life and Legend of the Last Empress of China,'' helps explain why Japan is today one of the ''world's richest and most deceitful governments.''Having reported on Japan for a decade, I was surprised by how much I had missed. For instance, despite long hours spent listening to Japanese leaders dilate on the intricacies of rice subsidies or the dangers of importing aluminum baseball bats from the United States, I learned for the first time that ''many Japanese politicians . . . still state flatly that Japan did not lose the war.'' Here is another of the Seagraves' news flashes: Japan's economy was not really shattered by World War II -- its secret agents had socked away enough fascist gold to underwrite a buoyant rise from the ashes.Behind this long-running imperial racket is a crew of Dick Tracy-like characters, including the former prime minister Nobusuke Kishi, who ''resembled a salamander,'' and the ''prune-faced'' former prime minister Noboru Takeshita. (It's true that Kishi, whom I had occasion to interview, was no Clark Gable, and did have a complicated past, but I confess that I totally missed the face thing with Takeshita and, on the whole, found Japanese pols no slipperier, say, than Al Gore among the Buddhist nuns.)But predation has its price. By the late 1980's, the Seagraves tell us, ''so much black money was in circulation from war loot'' that Japan's speculative bubble eventually burst. And to think that some of us were bamboozled into believing that it was Economics 101 at work -- too many surplus dollars from exports channeled into too few Cartier wristwatches, overpriced Impressionist paintings and gaudy Tokyo condos.The book's real blockbuster, though, is the story of how Emperor Hirohito escaped prosecution as a war criminal. By 1945, we're told, Japan owed American lenders huge amounts of money. Enter former President Herbert Hoover. A well-known Quaker, he conspired with ''a network of Quakers and near-Quakers'' within Japan's elite to preserve the royal family. Hoover and his allies worked to ensure, first, that Japan did not go Communist; second, that its financial gnomes stayed in place; and, third, that Wall Street got its money back.Meanwhile, Gen. Douglas MacArthur, the ruler of occupied Japan, was suborning key witnesses in the Tokyo war crimes trials to keep Hirohito out of the dock, in hopes that one day Hoover and his Republican friends would help him occupy the White House. In saving the throne, the Seagraves argue, MacArthur deviously undermined real democratic reforms in Japan and became a ''perfect patsy'' for the men who had ruled Japan before the war and would continue to do so secretly after the war. (Well, not all that secretly -- several generations of foreign reporters stationed in Tokyo knew where to find them.)The occupation had its share of dark corners and high-handed behavior, to be sure. MacArthur did flirt with the presidency, even if his towering self-regard made him an unlikely patsy for anybody. He did use the throne, but as a tool for what the Pulitzer Prize-winning historian John W. Dower calls his ''almost messianic zeal'' for democratizing Japan. Even though Communist advances in China and Korea forced a reversal of early policies, postwar Japan emerged, as Dower points out, ''a vastly freer and more egalitarian nation'' than before the war.One needs to be open to new theories, of course, but big conspiracy theories require big proof, and the Seagraves fail to provide it. Despite copious footnotes, key sources are weak, or missing altogether. The authors tell us, for example, that ''documents show'' that MacArthur and Hoover knew about a ''massive recovery'' of Japanese war loot and, further, that large deposits of gold bullion were placed in accounts bearing their names -- yet I could find no further details in their book about these pivotal papers.But then you can't be too careful. ''Old ways die hard in Japan,'' we learn, ''where it can still cost your life to speak aloud.'' My opinionated 77-year-old mother-in-law in Tokyo would find that one almost as rich as the idea that ''older generations of Japanese still believe that if they look directly into an emperor's face, they will be blinded.''Yet even a book that presents a darkly cartoonish view of modern Japan contains elements of truth. The Seagraves are right to say we should not remember Emperor Hirohito as simply the charming old gent who met Mickey Mouse on a 1975 trip to Disneyland and overlook his role in a war that ravaged Asia in his name. But you have to wonder if it really helps drive the point home to sum up Hirohito's long, roller-coaster reign by likening it to ''the kingdom of Mickey -- his only true rival.''Let Me Say ThisWe are here now but soonwe will not be here.There are pigeons asleep in the sunlighton the roof of the station house in Greenlawn;there is an elderly woman on a benchlooking up from a crossword puzzle.And on the train a girl cuts the curlson a doll and talks to itwith the whimsical authorityof a mother of the inanimateor the invisible, the way the womanI used to meet in the restroomin Penn Station was always fussingand baby talking into a carriagethat, except for a few cansand some garbage, was empty.Malena MRated PG-13rling, from ''Ocean Avenue''(New Issues Press).Tracy Dahlby, a former Tokyo bureau chief for Newsweek and The Washington Post, is writing a book entitled ''Sailing the China Seas.''
Completing the RevolutionA Vision for Victory in 2000.By Robert D. Novak.241 pp. New York:The Free Press. $24.Completing the RevolutionA Vision for Victory in 2000.By Robert D. Novak.241 pp. New York:The Free Press. $24.IT is extraordinary to recall, given its parlous condition, just how irresistible the Republican revolution looked as recently as 1994. The party of the future was storming the Capitol under Bombardier Gingrich and advancing steadily through the states; the Democrats were rapidly becoming yesterday's men, rooted in big labor and big government, and doomed to irrelevance by a technological revolution that rewarded individual initiative rather than collective muscle.What went wrong? Robert D. Novak's new book is billed as ''a vision for victory,'' a call to arms by one of the most recognizable conservative pundits in the business. (For those who cannot put a face to the name, a photograph of Novak on the cover has him looking suitably saturnine.) But much of the book is taken up less with rallying the troops than with castigating the fainthearts who run the party.Novak thinks that a big reason for the party's disarray is that it has succumbed to the illusion that it can govern the country from Capitol Hill. Republicans watched George Mitchell run rings around George Bush and concluded not just that they had landed a dud for a president but that the balance of power had shifted. The result was disaster. The White House is a centralized operation that can shape day-to-day political debate. Capitol Hill is a world of warring chieftains and headless chickens. The unequal battle has left the Republicans thoroughly ''Clintonized'': obsessed with polls and competing to spend more public money than their rivals. The only way that the Republicans can complete the revolution is to retake the White House.But how? Novak advocates a right-wing version of the ''Bulworth doctrine'': stick to your principles and the polls will take care of themselves. The central political question of our time is actually quite simple, Novak contends: do you prefer freedom or government? Choose freedom and your agenda writes itself: cut taxes, embrace the global free market and use term limits to force politicians to side with the people rather than with the system.Novak presents his case with all the verve that you might expect from the co-host of CNN's ''Crossfire''; ''Completing the Revolution'' also contains plenty of delicious detail, reminding us that Novak is a real reporter as well as a talking head. And yet, for all its virtues, his book is more of an exercise in recycling Gingrichism than a genuine attempt to come to terms with conservatism's predicament. Novak regards hostility to government as the beginning of all wisdom. But these days most people are too prosperous to join antigovernment crusades, and too aware of the volatility of the global economy to want to get rid of the safety net.Novak wastes a great deal of time in a vain attempt to discredit polls that show waning support for tax cuts. Worse still, he refuses to engage in a much more interesting argument: whether quasi-market mechanisms can be used to redefine public services. One of the best chances Republicans have of winning over women and minorities is to embrace school vouchers, which Novak hardly deigns to mention.He is equally unadventurous when it comes to rethinking the Republican coalition. He argues vigorously that the party needs to keep its links with religious fundamentalists. But people like Pat Robertson and Bob Jones are not only incompatible with the ideal of freedom that Novak says he puts at the heart of his politics. They are positively antagonistic to it.The Republicans really ought to be the natural party of government, given the triumph of markets and entrepreneurialism. Yet they may not even be able to defeat a scandal-plagued vice president with little in the way of charm or charisma. The problem, put simply, is that the party is now the prisoner of special interests, from lobbyists to religious fundamentalists, who are undermining its ability to appeal to ordinary Americans. Completing the revolution will require rather more internal upheaval than Novak is willing to sanction.Adrian Wooldridge is a Washington-based correspondent for The Economist. He is the author, with John Micklethwait, of ''A Future Perfect.''
George W. Bush had just nailed down the Republican Party's presidential nomination with his Super Tuesday primary victories, and in Texas it was a night to celebrate. (The campaign contributions were not down the drain after all, thank you, Jesus.) Yet the winner's top strategist, Karl Rove, moved uncomfortably through the victory bash at the Four Seasons in Austin that evening. ''The king has arrived!'' someone shouted at Rove, and the king winced. ''This is because of you,'' said a woman who dribbled her drink on his jacket as she hugged him. When Michael Levy, the publisher of Texas Monthly, knelt before him with a flourish and pretended to kiss his ring, Rove turned around, bent over at the waist and hiked up his jacket. As in, ''Kiss this.''Rove was laughing, of course. Everyone was. But bristling, too, not so far underneath, at even this celebratory moment. When I asked him if he was enjoying himself, he said no. ''Boring, man, boring,'' he yelled, raising his voice to make himself heard. He didn't seem so much bored, though, as thrown by all the attention -- particularly the positive stuff. As his wife, Darby, later remarked, ''He knows they can turn on you at any time.'' Rove looked nervous about taking any credit away from his old friend George, who is wary of high-profile handlers.George W. Bush had just nailed down the Republican Party's presidential nomination with his Super Tuesday primary victories, and in Texas it was a night to celebrate. (The campaign contributions were not down the drain after all, thank you, Jesus.) Yet the winner's top strategist, Karl Rove, moved uncomfortably through the victory bash at the Four Seasons in Austin that evening. ''The king has arrived!'' someone shouted at Rove, and the king winced. ''This is because of you,'' said a woman who dribbled her drink on his jacket as she hugged him. When Michael Levy, the publisher of Texas Monthly, knelt before him with a flourish and pretended to kiss his ring, Rove turned around, bent over at the waist and hiked up his jacket. As in, ''Kiss this.''Rove was laughing, of course. Everyone was. But bristling, too, not so far underneath, at even this celebratory moment. When I asked him if he was enjoying himself, he said no. ''Boring, man, boring,'' he yelled, raising his voice to make himself heard. He didn't seem so much bored, though, as thrown by all the attention -- particularly the positive stuff. As his wife, Darby, later remarked, ''He knows they can turn on you at any time.'' Rove looked nervous about taking any credit away from his old friend George, who is wary of high-profile handlers.It was Rove who hatched the whole concept of the Bush campaign, starting with the parade of Republicans who showed up in Austin begging the governor to run. But after Bush lost to Senator John McCain in New Hampshire and later in Michigan, there was widespread panic among campaign contributors and plenty of grousing from Daddy Bush's old team: what did this Rove really know about running a national campaign? The question hasn't gone away either. In his own party, he is seen by many as both too inexperienced and too smitten by his candidate to be of much use. Yet the story here is not ''Jethro Runs a Presidential Campaign.'' If George W. Bush is not elected president, it won't be because Karl Rove isn't tough enough. And he is not in love.In the last 20 years, Rove has run and won most every major Republican campaign in Texas, and he has been relentless in the service of his clients and their conservative cause. And if some of his cutthroat, cowboy image is hype -- he is awfully eager to talk about his old buddy Lee Atwater's profound influence on his life -- the least that can be said is that it's hype that has worked. In Austin, his hometown, he is generally regarded as either: a) a genius, or b) an evil genius, with a subspecialty in screaming, over-the-top phone calls about perceived betrayals, usually of George W. When I started to ask him about the phone calls recently, he cut me off: ''Somebody who had done the wrong thing with somebody I was working for? You bet. Somebody out there bad-mouthing? You bet I'll chew on them. You bet I get in their face.'' His anger is real enough.And when I brought up the talk about his experience being too provincial, his response again was pretty macho: ''No, I haven't run a national campaign, but who has? Jim Baker?'' This he said as if being James Baker, who reluctantly ran President Bush's 1992 campaign, is maybe not such a good thing. Rove said he would, of course, be bringing in reinforcements, and already, a number of better-known operatives, including Haley Barbour and Mary Matalin, have been hired to lend advice. Yet Rove could not help adding, sneeringly: ''But do you repopulate the campaign with people from 1908? No!''There are other concerns about Rove: he cannot hope to maintain airtight message control -- the hallmark of his earlier campaigns, including W.'s gubernatorial runs -- in the circus atmosphere of a presidential race. And quite possibly, Rove's arrogance and his tendency to take politics personally are not the ideal check on Bush's arrogance and tendency to take politics personally. But Republicans can stop worrying that Karl Rove is too down-home, laid-back, blissed out or otherwise insufficiently aggressive for the job.At one point during that big evening at the Four Seasons, Rove retreated to a hotel suite upstairs to crunch numbers and monitor TV chat. He phoned the Bush campaign's communications director, Karen Hughes, to tell her what to say on the air. (Earlier, he had also told her what to tell Bush to say.) Then he disappeared into the bathroom with his cell phone to take a call from Bush.Rove and his boss had been on the phone throughout the day, and from his office at Bush central that afternoon, he gave Bush the good news from the exit polls, taking special pleasure in the McCain campaign ''meltdown,'' as he called it.''It's not pretty, they say,'' he told Bush on the phone. ''It's not pretty how the numbers are being received. He's going to Arizona, and the scuttlebutt is he's going to his cabin and nobody thinks he can continue. Yeah, recriminations, finger-pointing. No, over there. Oh, big time. It's unbelievable.'' They dished McCain's campaign manager, Rick Davis, or at least Rove did: ''Yeah, he is a bad guy. This guy was a lobbyist for Imelda Marcos and General Abacha of Nigeria! Just the consummate inside-D.C. thug. He needs adult supervision.'' (Davis's firm, though not Davis himself, did some work for Marcos and for Nigeria when Abacha was in power.)Just as Rove finished talking to Bush from the hotel bathroom that evening, boisterous, good-natured Karen Hughes burst into the suite, and Rove told her he just wanted to ''get New York over with so we can go home.''''Go home?'' Hughes yelled. ''I want to celebrate.''Rove sighed, and she rubbed his shoulders for a minute. ''Congratulations,'' she told him -- quietly, for her. As in, could you try to enjoy it a little?They hovered near the TV, and when Bush finally came on CNN, Hughes marveled at how well he was performing. ''He's really gotten good at doing these satellite feeds,'' she said. ''He'd never done any before.''Rove, though, was still frowning. And when Bernard Shaw asked the governor whether, ''if you were to win the delegates in California but lose the popular vote,'' McCain might conceivably stay in the race, Rove bellowed at the screen: ''Hey, what if we win both? Will you --''Then he said something that was not ''kiss my ring.''You won't be seeing any gauzy, feel-good clips from Karl Rove's early life in a campaign video at the convention this summer. Dad -- his adoptive dad -- was gone a lot, working. Mom moved the family around, restless. The kid missed him, fought with her. Finally Dad left for good. On a Christmas Day, actually. Then Mom packed for Reno. And later, when he was all grown up, she killed herself. ''Nothing special about the Roves,'' Karl summed up defiantly when asked some pap question about where he had grown up. (Answer: Out West, Colorado mostly, though he went to high school in Salt Lake City.)At 49, all round and successful and stressed out by the right things now, Rove sat in his Austin office and looked back on his younger self as a ''strange kid'' who grew into a ''big nerd, complete with the pocket protector, briefcase, the whole deal.'' He loved history and books of all kinds, really, and spent most of his free time in the library, preparing for his debating-team competitions.His debating partner and best friend in Salt Lake City, Mark Dangerfield, now an attorney in Phoenix, said that one thing that really seemed to bother his friend back then was that ''he was raised in a completely nonreligious home.'' When I asked Rove about this, he said: ''I'm not sure I've ever found faith. Others here'' -- others in the campaign, including George W. -- I know how much their faith sustains them. Some of them have a prayer group. I haven't been good enough yet.''At some point, politics, conservative politics, became Rove's true religion -- though his family wasn't Republican or in any way political, for that matter. And right from the beginning, he saw politics as a contact sport: ''The little girl across the street I can remember beating the hell out of me in 1960 because I was for Nixon and she was for Kennedy. She had a couple of years and a few pounds on me, and I can remember being on the pavement.'' He volunteered for one of the campaigns of Wallace F. Bennett, the Utah senator, while still in high school, and essentially he never came off the trail.College was off and on: Rove began at the University of Utah in 1969, thinking of majoring in political science, but after his parents split up during his freshman year, he says, ''I had to start to fend for myself.'' To earn money for school, he worked in a convenience store and was robbed at gunpoint. And he never did get a degree, still a tender spot with him. One thing he seems to like best about Bush, in fact, is that the governor seems to share some of Rove's resentment of Ivy Leaguers, though he is one himself.All that Rove went through when he was young made him into a man his wife, Darby, describes as ''a combination of in-your-face and sensitive.'' Darby Rove is a graphic artist who worked for her husband's political direct-mail business before they were married, and over a long lunch earlier this spring she was both admiring and bracingly frank about him. She called him a creative genius and a committed father to their 11-year-old son, Andrew, but also said he can be fierce and quite intimidating, even when he's trying not to be.''He's learned to lay back a little bit when he and Andrew play chess,'' she told me, ''but even in croquet he'd be hitting my ball so far I was crying on vacation.'' It isn't only that he's always working, she said, but that working for Republicans is the organizing principle of his life, at the center of his world, which he tends to divide into friends and foes. ''I told Karl the other day,'' she said, ''You see things in black and white. I see lots of gray.'''Rove does have a softer side; when I mentioned how much I had liked his wife, who has had a long battle with breast cancer, his eyes filled with tears. ''She is one of the most courageous people I know,'' he said. But as she suggested, he does talk a lot about the forces of good and evil.Even in the race he ran to head the College Republicans in his early 20's, he and his allies were ''the good guys'' and his opponent and his supporters were ''the bad guys.'' Atwater, his fellow College Republican, fixed it so that he'd win that campaign, Rove says. Nothing too nefarious, though, just charming some women, who even in that election turned out to be the swing voters. Afterward, Rove hired Atwater to help him in the job, his first real job. And they traveled the country together, recruiting college kids. This was smack in the middle of Watergate -- not exactly go-go years for campus Republicans. But the thing that came across most plainly as Rove talked about his work, then and now, is the sense that he is absolutely unafraid.So is he like Atwater?''I guess I'm more cerebral and lack his great people skills,'' Rove said. ''And I'm more of a nerd. Lee was a nerd in high school, but then he learned to play the guitar and talk to girls, and I never did. That's serious.'' They both met George Bush in that job, of course, and his son George W. too. And both Rove and Atwater ended up going to work for the elder Bush -- Rove down in Texas, where he has been ever since.When I asked people who have worked with Rove in Texas what makes a classic ''Karl campaign,'' they all used the same word: control. He picks a few campaign themes and goes to great pains to keep his candidates on message. A year before Bush first ran for governor, against Ann Richards in 1994, he was invited to participate in a little skit being put on by a Republican women's group in Dallas, and Rob Allyn, a Republican consultant who was working on the event, got a call from Rove. ''He said Bush would make fun of himself, his mother or whatever,'' Allyn recalled recently, ''but he would not under any circumstances make fun of Ann Richards and would appear only on that condition.'' Allyn was floored: ''It's a year out! Bush hasn't even said he's running. This is a skit for the faithful. But Karl has decided that they're not going to run against Ann's personality, because she has a great personality, so he's on the phone, all serious.''There are also a lot of stories of Rove's bullying on behalf of Bush. Frank Cahoon, one of the first Republicans ever elected to the Texas House (he is now retired from politics and living in Midland) heard from Rove after Cahoon openly disagreed with some of the appointments Bush made upon being elected governor. He called one Sunday night and went on for an hour, Cahoon recalled: ''Karl was reading me the riot act as a traitor. I said, 'Who cares what some old man out here in the desert thinks?''' Cathie Adams, who heads the Texas Eagle Forum, a conservative antifeminist group, said that after she criticized some of Bush's policies, she got a call from Rove, too: ''You don't cross him unless you want a lot of grief and threats.''Rove also tries to keep the press in line. When an Austin publication, The Lone Star Report, ran negative stories about the governor's tax plan in 1997, Rove not only called to complain but also yelled for 45 minutes straight. ''I was sitting 10 feet away'' from the guy who took the call, said the current managing editor, David Guenthner, ''and I could hear every word.''A friend of mine in Texas, Anne Marie Kilday, a former colleague at The Dallas Morning News, says Rove called her at home early one morning during Bush's race against Richards. Republicans had been shopping a story about supposed malfeasance by a female state official Kilday covered. According to Kilday, Rove said he was looking over the telephone records of this official, who is a lesbian, and said he found it interesting that there had been a number of calls to Kilday from the official ''at your residence.'' Kilday recalled, ''He said, 'You've just got to be careful about your reputation and what people might think.'''When I asked Rove about the story without mentioning names, he said: ''I have no recollection of that. I know exactly who it is, though.'' The official's sexuality, he said, would have had nothing to do with it. ''I would never have had that conversation,'' he said.Probably the weirdest story about Rove-related intrigue goes back to 1986, when he was working for Bill Clements, a Republican and a former governor, in his run against Gov. Mark White. Literally hours before the two were supposed to debate for the first and only time in that race, the big news broke that a listening device had been discovered in Rove's office, hidden behind a red, white and blue needlepoint of the G.O.P. elephant. An investigation came to nothing, but the incident infuriated White's people, who accused Rove of planting the bug himself to distract the White camp and muddy White's reputation at a crucial moment. Would Rove really have gone that far for a client? Probably not, I had thought.But then I rented a movie he recommended, a Sidney Lumet film, ''Power,'' about the high-flying, low-sinking life of one really smart political consultant, played by Richard Gere. ''I thought of myself as the Richard Gere character,'' Rove had said wryly. ''He has the fabulous office and the New York high-rise and he gets paid $25,000 a month by everybody. You gotta rent this, it's so unbelievably stupid. He's working for this guy who's a total schlump, and of course they get the schlump elected governor.'' Rove's point, he made clear, was that Hollywood was wrong, deliciously wrong. Because in real life, he believes, the schlumps are generally found out.It's not such an unrealistic movie, really, but I was surprised to watch as Gere's character discovers, in the heat of a gubernatorial race . . . that his office has been bugged. And as it happens, the movie was released in 1986, the same year Rove's office was said to have been bugged. When I asked him about the coincidence, he laughed, then stopped laughing and kind of cocked his head. Then he said, ''I don't have any recollection of that.''The feeling in the Bush camp seems to be that whatever Rove has done has worked pretty well so far; he is fully in charge and likely to remain so. Rove's friend Reggie Bashur, who has worked for Bush in the past, probably summed it up best: ''They're winning, so it's like that old saying, 'If it ain't broke, don't fix it.''' And Rove himself sounds downright complacent about making the leap onto the national stage. ''It's not much different,'' he said. ''In some ways, it's easier, because there are more places where they haven't heard the same thing'' repeated over and over. Moving into the summer, Rove seems to be relying on classic back-to-the-middle moves, getting Bush talking about health care for the poor, for example.One piece of good news for Bush is that Rove is not starry-eyed about his man, as is widely believed -- he has enough distance to make cool decisions. There is no question he is wild about Bush as a candidate. But he seems to see Bush as much as a symbol as a man. Once, when I asked him if the Republican takeover in Texas would have been possible without a George W. Bush, he thought about it for a minute, then said, ''If George W. Bush didn't exist, we'd have to find a way to create somebody like him.''As Darby Rove sees it, her husband's relationship with the governor is more philosophical than personal. Rove ''has hundreds of friends and no one he's intimate with'' outside the family, she said.Not even the governor?She shook her head. ''I don't think so,'' she said. ''Neither one of them is going to volunteer their deepest feelings. It's a relationship where Bush just tells you how it is. If he's hungry, it's, 'When's dinner?' and if he's tired, it's, 'I'm going to bed.'''Bush has often said he loves Rove's loyalty, and there is the fact that Rove sold his business to devote all his energies to him. But how the candidate really feels about his chief handler is difficult to say; he doesn't like to see too many articles about the help and initially didn't want to be quoted in this one about Rove. ''We handed him the phone and he refused -- he said he just wasn't going to do it,'' a Bush aide explained apologetically. ''He doesn't mind you doing staff stories,'' this aide added, though no one had suggested that he did. ''But he doesn't always weigh in.''Finally, the candidate did leave this phone message for me: ''This is Gov. George Bush. I understand you're writing an article on Karl. I've known Karl a long time, since about 1972. I know him as a friend, and I've been in combat with him, political combat, on more than one occasion. I think -- I know -- he's brilliant. He is very witty and fun to be around. He's well read and an all-around good man. Thank you for your interest'' -- long pause -- in Karl.''Melinda Henneberger is a reporter in The New York Times Washington bureau.
IN its heyday, from the mid-1970's to the early 1980's, each year as many as 70,000 people attended the daylong New England Fiddle Contest in Hartford's Bushnell Park. Music lured people to the fiddle fest, but the easygoing camaraderie the tunes inspired made them want to linger. Picnic blankets were spread, babies were jiggled in time to the music, and Hartford basked in the glow of the event.Feeling nostalgic? You're in luck. The festival, which returned last year after a 15-year hiatus, will take place again on May 27, from 9:30 a.m. until dusk.IN its heyday, from the mid-1970's to the early 1980's, each year as many as 70,000 people attended the daylong New England Fiddle Contest in Hartford's Bushnell Park. Music lured people to the fiddle fest, but the easygoing camaraderie the tunes inspired made them want to linger. Picnic blankets were spread, babies were jiggled in time to the music, and Hartford basked in the glow of the event.Feeling nostalgic? You're in luck. The festival, which returned last year after a 15-year hiatus, will take place again on May 27, from 9:30 a.m. until dusk.In an era filled with talk of peace, love and understanding, it's not surprising that an organization named Peace Train would conceive the fiddle fest. In the 1970's, the group's members were committed to bringing free entertainment to the city of Hartford, sometimes via an old school bus decked out in vibrant colors.Twenty-six years and far shorter sideburns later, some former members of the nonprofit group reunited (sans bus), under the leadership of Peace Train's founder, Paul LeMay, to revive the fiddle fest. Last year, the event attracted a crowd of about 5,000 people. This year, Peace Train is producing the festival in partnership with the Hartford Downtown Council, which works with the MetroHartford Chamber of Commerce to promote the city.''One of the great things about the fiddle fest is the cross-section of the crowd,'' said Mr. LeMay, a tall man in his 50's who favors berets and the kind of vests worn by professional photographers or fishermen. (In fact, he is a semiretired computer specialist for a Hartford insurance company.) ''We get the people who arrive on Harley Davidsons and Yamahas and those who drive up in BMW's,'' said Mr. LeMay.Mr. LeMay said he would be pleased if the fiddle fest inspired younger people to join the Peace Train organization. Last year's festival was produced in part to mark the 25th anniversary of the founding of Peace Train.More than 55 fiddlers will compete in several categories at this year's free festival. Three members of the North America Fiddling Judges Organization will evaluate the performers, but an audience applause meter will gauge who is the best in the ''trick and fancy'' division.'' 'Trick and fancy' is shorthand for nontraditional fiddling,'' said Tim Woodbridge, a former judge at the fiddle fest and a retired lawyer who lives in Granby. Playing the fiddle while holding it behind your back or standing on your head could be among the tricks. The category also includes variations on popular fiddle songs, like ''The Orange Blossom Special,'' a tune as familiar to the fiddling community as ''Happy Birthday'' is to the rest of us. (Another note to the uninitiated: the violin and the fiddle are the same instrument.)The other divisions are determined by age. There are two junior divisions, 12 and under and 13 to 18, as well as the open division for ages 18 to 64 and the senior division for people 65 and older. Mr. LeMay said many children perform, and several return as adults to play.Jon Steucek a 50-year-old woodworker who lives in Cromwell, plans to return to this year's fiddle fest. For him the contest is a ''fun day, a chance to play some good tunes for people and listen to other people play,'' he said. In the many years that Mr. Steucek has played in the festival, he has performed accompanied by a guitar and a bass fiddle. The rest of the year, his band, the Portable Folk Festival, performs at various country fairs; for the past 18, they have played at the Fourth of July Chester Road Race.For others who perform professionally, the festival renews old acquaintances and sometimes leads to more gigs.That has been true for Donna Hebert, a 51-year-old Northhampton fiddler who travels around the country, performing with three different bands. A two-time winner in the open division, she favors tunes of her Canadian ancestors. ''For some people the festival is a chance to play out,'' she said referring to playing for an audience. ''For me, it's very much a social thing, a chance to schmooze.''Ms. Hebert gingerly described the early years of the fiddle fest by saying, ''It was a more permissive time.'' Wine was the beverage of choice for many at the early festivals; no alcohol is permitted at the more recent festivals.The festival has very modest origins. The first, inspired by a small festival Mr. LeMay discovered while hitchhiking in Vermont, cost less than $2,000. It was 1974, and Peace Train members knocked on the doors of corporations to get money. They continue to do so today, although they have added a Web site (www.fiddlefest.org) to their retinue. Mr. Woodbridge said the festival grew to be so big, it ''took on a life of its own.'' Soon, the city of Hartford asked Peace Train for money for crowd control and clean-up. Eventually, corporate funding grew scarce, Peace Train members grew older, and the event fizzled out in 1984.This year the festival is expected to cost about $80,000, Mr. LeMay said. Funding from the Big Y Supermarket chain came through just last month. The event will include various food booths, and a preview concert, probably of bluegrass music, will be held the night before to draw media attention to the festival. The rain date is Sunday.''The event became a happening, and hopefully it still is,'' Mr. Woodbridge said. ''All sorts of people will be there, from very dedicated music lovers to people who want their children to hear fiddle music to those who simply think it might be a good day to bask in the sun on a blanket.''What made the early years of the fiddle fest so popular?''I think it was a carryover from the 1960's, getting together for music,'' said Tony Caruso, the executive director of the Hartford Downtown Council. For others, the day evokes more distinct, albeit less music-oriented, memories.''The weather was warm, and girls wore cutoff shorts,'' mused a 45-year-old Hartford businessman who declined to give his name. ''It was a good day.''
HE set ''The Barber of Seville'' in a health club, and now he is sending Mozart into space. Dan Montez, director of Taconic Opera's current production, ''Cosi Fan Tutte,'' says he rarely presents operas the old-fashioned way, set in their own time periods. Without changing a word or a note, he updates them -- mostly for fun, he says, but also to give a new spin to the story.This ''Cosi'' takes place on an unnamed planet two hundred years from now, and yes, women are still like that, fickle creatures who cannot be faithful to their lovers. The scheming men who have placed temptation in the women's path do not get off scot-free, however. Mr. Montez will not reveal the ending, but he describes it as vastly satisfying. ''Everybody is so shallow and despicable by the end that you wonder how they can just make up'' as they usually do, he said. In this production, ''the subtext is how people would genuinely act.''HE set ''The Barber of Seville'' in a health club, and now he is sending Mozart into space. Dan Montez, director of Taconic Opera's current production, ''Cosi Fan Tutte,'' says he rarely presents operas the old-fashioned way, set in their own time periods. Without changing a word or a note, he updates them -- mostly for fun, he says, but also to give a new spin to the story.This ''Cosi'' takes place on an unnamed planet two hundred years from now, and yes, women are still like that, fickle creatures who cannot be faithful to their lovers. The scheming men who have placed temptation in the women's path do not get off scot-free, however. Mr. Montez will not reveal the ending, but he describes it as vastly satisfying. ''Everybody is so shallow and despicable by the end that you wonder how they can just make up'' as they usually do, he said. In this production, ''the subtext is how people would genuinely act.''Mr. Montez said he borrowed the ending from the San Francisco Opera, whose audiences stood and applauded the modern twist. The opera, conducted by Neal Goren, can be seen at the Yorktown Stage in Yorktown on Friday and Saturday at 8 p.m. and Sunday at 2 p.m. The production features two separate casts, a full orchestra and English supertitles. Tickets, from $32 to $47, can be reserved by calling 739-2165.ROBERTA HERSHENSONOPERA
Diamonds may be forever, but fashion faddists who think forever is too long are lusting after rhinestones. After Dolce & Gabbana sent rhinestones twinkling down its spring runway and Chloe used them to dress up retro aviator sunglasses, designers have been putting stones on everything from T-shirts (the one on left, from Studd, is $275 at Language) to cuff links (DieselStyleLab, $80; to order at 212-755-9200). Sonia Rykiel embellishes leather belts with square rhinestones ($315 at Kirna Zabete) and Noir offers suede versions at Calypso ($105 to $130) as well as rhinestone-strewn flip-flops ($60). Language sells ''skin jewelry'' ($35 to $250), rhinestone and glitter appliques in flower shapes by the British hair stylist J. Maskrey. In Los Angeles, Dana Bushkin turned Puma and Adidas sneakers into disco numbers ($120 for baby sizes; $160, adults; to order, 310-474-2526) that she has sold to Pamela Anderson and Sarah Jessica Parker. Why this rage? Sasha Charnin, fashion market director of Allure, who has been rhinestoning Back Street Boys bandanas ($235 at Kirna Zabete), says, ''If you can't be a rock star, you might as well dress like one.''KAREN ROBINOVITZDiamonds may be forever, but fashion faddists who think forever is too long are lusting after rhinestones. After Dolce & Gabbana sent rhinestones twinkling down its spring runway and Chloe used them to dress up retro aviator sunglasses, designers have been putting stones on everything from T-shirts (the one on left, from Studd, is $275 at Language) to cuff links (DieselStyleLab, $80; to order at 212-755-9200). Sonia Rykiel embellishes leather belts with square rhinestones ($315 at Kirna Zabete) and Noir offers suede versions at Calypso ($105 to $130) as well as rhinestone-strewn flip-flops ($60). Language sells ''skin jewelry'' ($35 to $250), rhinestone and glitter appliques in flower shapes by the British hair stylist J. Maskrey. In Los Angeles, Dana Bushkin turned Puma and Adidas sneakers into disco numbers ($120 for baby sizes; $160, adults; to order, 310-474-2526) that she has sold to Pamela Anderson and Sarah Jessica Parker. Why this rage? Sasha Charnin, fashion market director of Allure, who has been rhinestoning Back Street Boys bandanas ($235 at Kirna Zabete), says, ''If you can't be a rock star, you might as well dress like one.''KAREN ROBINOVITZPULSE
''IT'S TIME for ''Fiscal Jeopardy.''The first answer is: About $3.5 trillion, and falling rapidly.''IT'S TIME for ''Fiscal Jeopardy.''The first answer is: About $3.5 trillion, and falling rapidly.The correct question is: What is the national debt?The next answer: About $5.6 trillion and rising rapidly.The question: What is the national debt?Confused? Well, there are going to be many confusing claims and counterclaims emanating from the presidential campaign trail in the next few months about who will do more to put the federal government's finances in order. And they start with very different definitions of the debt.Vice President Al Gore puts his emphasis on the national debt held by the public, the $3.5 trillion that the government has borrowed by selling Treasury securities to individual investors, banks, pension funds and foreign governments.Gov. George W. Bush of Texas is taking the view that the government's obligations include not just the public debt, but also the special bonds it is issuing to the Social Security system in ever-growing amounts, representing promises to pay retirement benefits in decades ahead. By that accounting, the current $5.6 trillion in total debt will grow inexorably for years to come.The differences are coming into play as the candidates hurtle into a high-intensity debate about how to shore up Social Security in time for the aging of the baby boomers.Mr. Gore has made paying off the entire public debt by 2013 the centerpiece of his economic agenda. He wants to use excess Social Security revenue -- more than $2 trillion over the next decade -- to do it.Mr. Gore would then channel the interest savings from debt reduction to Social Security, in effect committing trillions of dollars of general tax revenue to keep the system afloat. In that way, he would extend the system's solvency from 2037 to around 2050 without cutting benefits, raising payroll taxes or altering the way Social Security works.In addition to helping deal with Social Security in a relatively painless way, Mr. Gore's plan would free up trillions of dollars for other kinds of investment, helping to put downward pressure on interest rates and create new economic opportunities for companies and individuals.Mr. Bush's approach is different. This week he plans to set out a goal of adding private investment accounts to Social Security, a major change that would require hundreds of billions, if not trillions, of dollars over the next decade. The only place to find that money is the Social Security surplus.To the extent that the surplus is used to finance private accounts, it would not be available to reduce the public debt, a goal in which Mr. Gore sees both economic logic and considerable political appeal.But Mr. Bush's team argues that reducing the public debt is not the only way to improve the government's financial condition. Because the private investment accounts would replace part of the government's obligation to pay Social Security benefits in the long run, his approach would in effect reduce the debt, broadly defined.''You'd be improving the government's balance sheet in an even more efficient way,'' said Lawrence B. Lindsey, the former Federal Reserve governor who is Mr. Bush's chief economic adviser.The scale of any reduction in total debt under Mr. Bush's approach would depend on the amount of money committed to the private accounts, a decision that Mr. Bush says should be made through bipartisan negotiations after he is elected.Under Mr. Gore's approach, the public debt would sink steadily, but all the while the Treasury's obligation to the Social Security trust fund would be rising even faster, from $855 billion today to $4.2 trillion in 2013. So even if the public debt is retired on Mr. Gore's schedule, the total debt would rise, from $5.6 trillion today to $6.8 trillion in 2013.The two plans are pretty much a wash when it comes to improving national savings. ''Whether you're taking $100 billion and buying down debt or adding it to a pool of private funds available for investment doesn't make a great deal of difference,'' said Robert D. Reischauer, president of the Urban Institute and a former director of the Congressional Budget Office.Mr. Gore's approach is conservative in the sense that it is based on debt reduction, but it affirms Democratic orthodoxy by retaining Social Security as a guaranteed benefit, even if tax revenue must pay for it.Mr. Bush bucks mainstream economic thinking to a degree when he plays down the importance of wiping out the public debt. But at heart, his plan is about transferring some control of retirement finances from the government to individuals -- a most basic conservative value.We'll be back with the final round of ''Fiscal Jeopardy'' in November, when the voters will decide.ECONOMIC VIEW
Looking a bit like a teenager forced to attend a classical music concert, Senator John McCain stood shoulder to shoulder with Gov. George W. Bush at a news conference on Tuesday in Pittsburgh.''I endorse Governor Bush, I endorse Governor Bush, I endorse Governor Bush,'' Mr. McCain intoned over and over, after a reporter asked why he seemed so reluctant to use the word.Looking a bit like a teenager forced to attend a classical music concert, Senator John McCain stood shoulder to shoulder with Gov. George W. Bush at a news conference on Tuesday in Pittsburgh.''I endorse Governor Bush, I endorse Governor Bush, I endorse Governor Bush,'' Mr. McCain intoned over and over, after a reporter asked why he seemed so reluctant to use the word.The repetition probably had the effect Mr. McCain intended: it reduced the term to ridiculousness. Still smarting over the negative turn that the primary campaign -- and some of Mr. Bush's commercials -- had taken, Mr. McCain had for weeks resisted falling into line behind the presumptive Republican nominee. When he finally did so last week, saying Mr. Bush had the ''vision, knowledge and expertise'' to be president -- and that he himself had no interest in being Mr. Bush's vice president -- there was a tight, grudging quality to the event.As if to confirm that the political and journalistic worlds have for months been hanging on Mr. McCain's every word, his utterance of that single word was the major political news of the week.Mr. Bush seemed pleased to have gotten over that hump, but Vice President Al Gore reminded audiences that the two Republicans were not all that in sync. Speaking that same day in Washington to the Anti-Defamation League, Mr. Gore brought up an issue that divides Mr. Bush and Mr. McCain, the Confederate flag that flies over the South Carolina statehouse.''It is wrong to remain silent about it,'' Mr. Gore said, an allusion to Mr. Bush's deferring to the people of South Carolina on the issue. (Mr. McCain recently declared he had erred in not announcing earlier that he favors the flag's removal.)When it comes to politics, Mr. Gore's boss is not remaining silent, either. It was disclosed last week that President Clinton is serving as a behind-the-scenes adviser to many Democratic candidates across the country.''The guy can't live without a campaign in his life,'' Senator John Breaux of Louisiana said.PETER MARKS
AT first glance, it was hard to say whether the scene looked more like a television chat show or a ''Saturday Night Live'' parody. There on a Washington stage last month sat Gov. George W. Bush, his wife, Laura, and two prominent Republican officeholders, both women, all in a semicircle and awaiting their first guest.On cue, out walked an adorable second grader with a giant white bow in her hair, along with one of her teachers. As the women beamed, Mr. Bush asked 7-year-old Elena Douglass, ''How is it here in the nation's capital? Are you having a good time?''AT first glance, it was hard to say whether the scene looked more like a television chat show or a ''Saturday Night Live'' parody. There on a Washington stage last month sat Gov. George W. Bush, his wife, Laura, and two prominent Republican officeholders, both women, all in a semicircle and awaiting their first guest.On cue, out walked an adorable second grader with a giant white bow in her hair, along with one of her teachers. As the women beamed, Mr. Bush asked 7-year-old Elena Douglass, ''How is it here in the nation's capital? Are you having a good time?''''Yes, sir, very,'' she whispered into her hand-held microphone.''Me too,'' confided Mr. Bush, who was using her to showcase his interest in literacy and foreign language instruction.Call it the infantilization of politics. Ever since President Clinton won re-election four years ago with child-centered issues like school uniforms, literacy and teenage smoking, candidates have increasingly behaved as if they are auditioning for the role of Santa Claus, and not running for public office.Yes, politicians have always kissed babies. And yes, even in 1988, both George Bush, the father, and Michael Dukakis were vying to be the education president. But it was Mr. Clinton who built a whole campaign around children, displaying his empathy for working parents by watching children make model airplanes, or dropping into a school that requires uniforms, or reading along with towheaded tykes.Bob Dole, his Republican opponent, once complained, ''You give President Clinton five minutes on television, he'll mention children 15 times.''This time around there are no complaints. Everybody's doing it. Just try to count how many times over the last year that Mr. Bush has read ''The Very Hungry Caterpillar'' to kindergartners to demonstrate his commitment to literacy. He said it was his favorite book from childhood -- no matter that it wasn't published until 1969, a year after he graduated from Yale.Or how about Al Gore in New Hampshire, where he not only knelt to read ''Tikvah Means Hope'' to 6-year-old Nikkita Gottling, but bought her the book and autographed it?These days, Mr. Gore can regularly be found in schools, eating in the cafeteria or sitting at a student's desk. This habit may even have raised the level of debate. At one high school, students were discussing the Plessy v. Ferguson case of 1896, in which the United States Supreme Court upheld the concept of separate but equal facilities for blacks and whites.Voters have put education and the decline of civic and cultural values at the top of their list of concerns. The boomers have made raising children an obsession, while more and more women voters are trying to balance motherhood and work.''If you will check out your Jeep Cherokee, you will see the vanity mirror is on both sides,'' said Alex Castellanos, a Republican political consultant. ''It's now on the driver's side and the soccer mom has her hand on the steering wheel. The soccer mom is 70 percent of consumer spending. Two out of three new college entrants are women. The economic power has shifted and she's still the key swing voter in suburban America.''What better way to play gender politics than by having a child on your lap? It  telegraphs warmth, empathy and understanding. ''Everyone who is running for office has to bend over backward to show that they know what it's like to be a typical American family,'' said Rachel Gorlin, a Democratic media consultant.Anyone who wanted a demonstration of the emotional power of an encounter with a child had only to watch Mr. Clinton hug a boy on crutches at the funeral for Cardinal John O'Conner, leaving the other dignitaries looking stiff and remote by comparison. Still, a few lonely voices in both parties deplore the dumbing down of political dialogue.''It atrophies the muscle of political debate,'' says Jeff Faux, a liberal Democrat at the Economic Institute, a Washington policy research center, who argues that it all started with Ronald Reagan's success with political imagery.William Kristol, the editor of The Weekly Standard, blames Mr. Clinton. ''The kid card is used as a trump and it trumps all debate,'' he said. ''You say this is good for our kids and that's the end of it, instead of here are the arguments for and against the measure.''Then again, Bill Bradley and John McCain, the primary candidates who ran on ''authenticity'' and ''substance,'' lost.In fact, politicians are using people as props more than ever. They hold small panel discussions with people who agree with them, to highlight some policy proposal. The elderly are paraded for discussion of Social Security. Nurses stand around listening to talk of health care.Most Republicans say they are delighted they have a nominee with some of Mr. Clinton's political skills and an ability to soften their party's image. ''Unfortunately, politics is about symbols and I don't even think you can overdo it,'' said David Horowitz, whose pamphlet ''The Art of Political War'' has been circulating among House Republicans.Several recent polls have shown Mr. Bush in the lead, and making a strong showing among married women, a swing group that Mr. Clinton won in 1996. So don't be surprised to see Mr. Bush and Mr. Gore surrounded by children, reading away like school librarians, right up to November.
James Beathard  Executed 12/9/99James Lee Beathard received the death sentence for his role in the 1984 murder of Gene Hathorn Sr., 45, his wife, Linda Sue, 34, and their 14-year-old son, Marcus, while they were watching television in their mobile home outside Groveton, a small town in East Texas.There was no physical evidence to link Mr. Beathard to the crime -- no fingerprints, no footprints, no blood. After giving investigators several different versions of what happened on the murderous night, Mr. Beathard finally admitted he had been at the mobile home, that he had accompanied Gene Hathorn Jr. on what he thought was a drug deal. When Mr. Hathorn began shooting his family, Mr. Beathard said he ran into the woods and hid.James Beathard  Executed 12/9/99James Lee Beathard received the death sentence for his role in the 1984 murder of Gene Hathorn Sr., 45, his wife, Linda Sue, 34, and their 14-year-old son, Marcus, while they were watching television in their mobile home outside Groveton, a small town in East Texas.There was no physical evidence to link Mr. Beathard to the crime -- no fingerprints, no footprints, no blood. After giving investigators several different versions of what happened on the murderous night, Mr. Beathard finally admitted he had been at the mobile home, that he had accompanied Gene Hathorn Jr. on what he thought was a drug deal. When Mr. Hathorn began shooting his family, Mr. Beathard said he ran into the woods and hid.Mr. Beathard was convicted largely on the testimony of Gene Hathorn Jr., who had wanted his family killed in order to collect a modest inheritance; after the murders, he discovered he had been written out of his father's will.At Mr. Beathard's trial, Mr. Hathorn testified that he had stood outside the trailer and fired a blast through the window with a shotgun; that had killed his father. Then, Mr. Hathorn -- who hoped that the state would go easier on him if he helped convict Mr. Beathard -- told the jury, Mr. Beathard, 24, a quiet, pot-smoking man who worked at the state mental hospital and had no experience with guns and no record of violence, had gone inside, brandishing a semi-automatic rifle and a semi-automatic pistol, and had finished off the victims.''Hathorn might be a cold-blooded killer, but there hasn't been any evidence in this courtroom that says he is a liar,'' the prosecutor, Joe L. Price, told the jurors. ''He is telling the truth.'' Mr. Beathard was convicted and sentenced to die.Then, several months later, Mr. Price tried Mr. Hathorn, who testified only at the punishment phase of his trial, hoping to avoid execution. Now Mr. Price in speaking to the jurors said that if they believed he was telling the truth, ''I'm a one-eyed hunting dog.''In his cross-examination of Mr. Hathorn, a man with a violent past and experience with guns, the prosecutor ridiculed the notion that Mr. Beathard, and not Mr. Hathorn, had gone inside and killed the family.''O.K., and here was this ol' boy that had never shot that pistol before, was not near as familiar as you with weapons, going into a house he had never been in before in his life, to attack two people that had some advance warning that he was coming,'' the prosecutor said to Mr. Hathorn. ''Does that seem a little bit strange to you, Gene?'' Mr. Hathorn was also convicted and sentenced to die. He remains on death row.A year after the trial, Mr. Hathorn recanted his testimony. He said that he had acted alone, that Mr. Beathard had been present but that he had hidden in the woods and had not participated in the killings. Based on this, Mr. Beathard's lawyers asked for a new trial. But the Texas Court of Criminal Appeals turned down the request because a criminal defendant has only 30 days after a judgment is entered against him to present new evidence that might justify a new trial.That 30-day period in Texas is longer than the 21-day deadline for the introduction of new evidence in Virginia, but it is still one of the shortest time periods in the country. Many states have no deadline.In a recent interview on death row at Livingston, Tex., Mr. Hathorn did not want to talk about the case. He put most of his answers ''off the record,'' even one on whether he still stuck to his recantation. He left no doubt, however, that he had been the one to go inside the trailer.Sixteen years after the Beathard trial, Mr. Price, the prosecutor, is still uncertain about what happened on the night of the crime. ''I'll be honest with you,'' he said, talking in his office in Groveton. ''I've vacillated on that one over the years.'' But he said that it did not matter what roles Mr. Hathorn and Mr. Beathard had played that evening since both were present -- under Texas ''law of parties'' they were equally guilty -- or even that Mr. Hathorn may have lied on the stand. ''Under Texas law my duty is to seek justice, and there is no question in my mind that these two people murdered the family,'' Mr. Price said.Not everyone agrees that justice was served.''Beathard should not have been put to death,'' said Mr. Burwell, a parole board member who voted with two others to have Mr. Beathard's sentence commuted to life in prison. Mr. Burwell explained why by getting out the Texas Code of Criminal Procedure and reading Article 2.0.1: ''It shall be the primary duty of all prosecuting attorneys, including any special prosecutors, not to convict, but to see that justice is done.'' He made a copy and handed it to a visitor. He had underlined the section, and double-underlined the word ''not.''Mr. Burwell believes that overzealous prosecutors are at the core of the problem with the Texas criminal justice system. ''If the prosecutor doesn't have integrity, there won't be justice,'' he said.Another member of the board, Linda Garcia, also voted for clemency. ''I don't believe anything improper happened with Beathard,'' said Ms. Garcia, a former prosecutor. ''My doubt is whether he deserved the death penalty.''Two jurors in the case recalled in recent interviews that they had been impressed by Mr. Price -- and less impressed by Mr. Beathard's court-appointed lawyer. ''It didn't seem to me like he was very forceful,'' one of the jurors, Dorothy Cates, said of Mr. Beathard's lawyer.Heber Taylor covered the Beathard and Hathorn trials for The Lufkin Daily News. Mr. Taylor asked Mr. Hathorn if Mr. Beathard had fired the shot from outside the trailer.''He just snorted in complete contempt,'' recalled Mr. Taylor, who is now editor of The Galveston Daily News. Mr. Beathard was too much of a patsy to kill anyone, Mr. Hathorn told Mr. Taylor.Steven Losch, a lawyer who does death penalty appellate work, said that when he first began working on Mr. Beathard's case he was uncertain whether he was innocent. But by a week before the execution, Mr. Losch had become convinced by Mr. Beathard's version of events.''This is the type of case that illustrates the risk of innocent people being executed in Texas,' Mr. Losch said.Mr. Sutton said that Governor Bush ''felt there was no reason'' not to execute Mr. Beathard. A jury had found that he participated in the murders, the appellate courts had determined that he had a fair trial, and there was ''no mitigation'' that would warrant not putting him to death, Mr. Sutton said.Troy FarrisExecuted 1/13/99Three weeks before Christmas, a young deputy sheriff, Clark Rosenbalm Jr., was murdered, shot twice with a Magnum .357, when he chanced upon a drug deal, on an isolated road outside Fort Worth. Troy Dale Farris, who was part of the deal, was convicted of the murder, but the manner in which the investigation and trial were conducted left many uneasy, including a remarkable number of members of the parole board.The crime scene was badly trampled by investigators and onlookers. Sixty-three photographs of the sheriff's patrol car disappeared. So did the plaster casts taken of tire tracks in the area. Marijuana was found on Sheriff Rosenbalm, but an investigator flushed it down the toilet, or so he first claimed. The investigator was indicted for perjury and planting evidence. Then, after Mr. Farris's trial was over and he was on death row, the indictment of the investigator was dismissed.The Court of Criminal Appeals concluded that ''the circumstantial and forensic evidence offered at trial not only failed to connect'' Mr. Farris with the murder, but it ''also failed in nearly all material respects to confirm the testimony'' of the two key witnesses against Mr. Farris.Mr. Farris was convicted largely on the testimony of a brother-in-law, Jimmy Daniels, who claimed that Mr. Farris had confessed to him, albeit not until a year after the crime. Mr. Daniels also led police to an area where he said his brother-in-law had once fired his Magnum .357 into a tree. The police recovered slugs, but the markings did not match those of the bullets that killed the sheriff.Moreover, Mr. Daniels's ''credibility was seriously undermined by the fact that'' his testimony before the grand jury had been inconsistent with his trial testimony, ''and, therefore, inconsistent with'' Mr. Farris's guilt, the Court of Criminal Appeals found.Nevertheless, the court voted to affirm the jury's finding of guilt. As a guiding principle, unless the court concludes that a ''rational trier of fact'' could not have found the defendant guilty based on all the evidence before it, the court upholds the jury's decision.The case bothered members of the parole board more than just about any other that has come before them during Mr. Bush's tenure. Seven members voted for some form of clemency, either commutation or a 30-day reprieve.''I had some questions on the fairness'' of the prosecution, explained Daniel Lang, a Bush appointee to the board, who has a National Rifle Association emblem on his desk and signed photographs of himself with Presidents Gerald R. Ford and George Bush on the walls of his office in Angleton.Mr. Sutton, the criminal adviser to Governor Bush, said that the governor could have granted a reprieve, but that he had ''looked at all the facts of the case and chose not to.''David CastilloExecuted 9/23/98Clarencio Champion was stabbed in a robbery of the Party House Liquor Store on North Texas Avenue in Mercedes, Tex. The injuries were not fatal, however, and he was recovering in the hospital, when, a week after the stabbing, he suddenly developed an infection and a high fever, and died. It turned out that during surgery, a nine-inch clamp had been left in Mr. Champion's stomach; Mr. Champion's widow eventually sued the doctor and the hospital for malpractice.But under Texas law, the person who set the events in motion that led to Mr. Champion's death could be prosecuted for capital murder, and that helped convict David Castillo, an 18-year-old high school dropout from Illinois, who had drifted down to South Texas. During Mr. Castillo's trial, the doctor testified that the leaving of the clamp inside Mr. Champion had been for the best because, he said, it prompted him to go back in and clean the wound.There was no direct evidence linking Mr. Castillo to the crime.About an hour after the robbery, Mr. Castillo appeared at a friend's home and washed his hands at an outside faucet. The police tested it for blood. ''It could not be determined whether the blood was human or not,'' the Texas Court of Criminal Appeals said.Mr. Castillo, who had pleaded guilty to another robbery-stabbing committed a month before the Party House crime, lacked the means for a strong defense. The state gave him $500 for an investigator. The trial court turned down Mr. Castillo's lawyer's request for an additional $600. The court ruled that there was no legal obligation to provide Mr. Castillo with the additional money.Rob Owen, a death penalty appellate lawyer with the Austin firm Schonemann, Roundtree & Owen, said that an adequate investigation would have required $5,000 to $10,000.Mr. Sutton, Governor Bush's criminal adviser, said it was difficult to know what it would have cost for a good investigation 17 years ago. He added, ''We do everything we can to put up enough money to represent these guys.''A critical witness against Mr. Castillo was Pedro Garcia, who was himself a suspect because he had worked across the street from the liquor store and knew Mr. Champion's pattern of going to and from the bank with money.At the time of the crime, Mr. Castillo was living with Mr. Garcia and his family in a public housing complex. Mr. Garcia testified that when Mr. Castillo came home late on the night of the robbery, his first words as he came though the door were, ''I did it.'' Mr. Castillo did not explain what it was he had done.The police searched Mr. Garcia's two-bedroom apartment. They found nothing. But the next day, his wife, Lucinda, found a bloody T-shirt and two money bags in a closet, and called the police.The jurors took only 45 minutes to find Mr. Castillo guilty. They might not have been so sure if Mr. Castillo's lawyers had found Pedro Garcia's uncle, Oscar Garcia.In a recent interview in his modest home in Mercedes, Oscar Garcia said things that might have led jurors to question Pedro Garcia's credibility. There was deep hatred, Mr. Garcia said, between the Garcia and Castillo families.Lucinda Garcia, 39, talked about the case in the four-room house in Mercedes where she is raising four of her children.''David, he never, ever admitted to it,'' she said. ''To this day, I wouldn't be sure he did it.''At the punishment phase of Mr. Castillo's trial, his sister and brother wanted to testify. But they could not afford to travel to Texas from their homes in the Midwest. And Mr. Castillo's lawyers did not ask the court for money to help them make the trip. Mitigating witnesses are essential if a jury is to be persuaded not to give a convicted murderer the death sentence.The character witnesses who did take the stand were not adequately prepared.''Neither one of the lawyers told us what they were going to ask us, or what kinds of things they wanted us to say,'' David Castillo's father, Juan Castillo Sr., said in an affidavit filed as part of his son's unsuccessful state habeas petition. ''I think I must have done more harm than good because I didn't know what to say.''It took the jury half an hour to vote the death sentence for Mr. Castillo, a sentence that Mr. Sutton, the Bush adviser, said was fair and supported by the case record.David Spence  Executed 4/3/97David Spence was executed in connection with the rape and torture murders of two 17-year-old girls and the murder of an 18-year-old boy in Waco. He received death sentences in two trials for the murders.Mr. Spence, a roofer with a history of substance abuse, was accused of a murder-for-hire killing that went awry, in which the three victims died. Muneer Deeb, a convenience store owner, was also charged and sentenced to death in the case. But he received a new trial and was acquitted in 1993. Mr. Deeb died last November of liver cancer. He had steadfastly maintained that neither he nor Mr. Spence had anything to do with the killings.The original police homicide investigator, Ramon Salinas, acknowledged in the appeals process that he had serious doubts about Mr. Spence's guilt. In a sworn deposition given to Mr. Spence's lawyers in 1993, Marvin Horton, a former Waco police lieutenant who was involved in the case, said, ''I do not think David Spence committed this offense.''The prosecution built its case against Mr. Spence around bite marks -- a state expert said that bite marks on the body of one of the girls matched Mr. Spence's teeth -- and jailhouse snitches, both of which can be highly unreliable forms of evidence. Mr. Spence was already in prison, serving a 90-year sentence for aggravated sexual abuse of an 18-year-old man, when he was indicted for the Waco killings.Two of the six jailhouse witnesses who testified at trial subsequently recanted, saying they had been given cigarettes, television privileges and alcohol, and one of them had been allowed conjugal visits with a girlfriend, in exchange for their accusations against Mr. Spence.Mr. Spence's post-conviction lawyers from the now-closed Texas Resource Center organized a blind panel study in which five experts -- odontologists -- said the bite marks could not be matched to Mr. Spence's teeth.Mr. Sutton, the governor's criminal justice adviser, said the verdict was fair and the death penalty was justified.With Governor Bush running for president, and the Texas death penalty system under heavier scrutiny, one of Mr. Spence's post-conviction lawyers, Raoul Schonemann, says ruefully that Mr. Spence is receiving more attention now than he did when his lawyers were fighting to save his life.''David certainly wanted us to persist in trying to bring out the truth,'' Mr. Schonemann said. ''I've always been willing to answer questions. But I feel very conflicted. It's competing with my time for our people who are living.''Odell Barnes  Executed 3/1/00Odell Barnes admitted to robbery and rape, and acknowledged that he was a crack  addict. But he went to his death maintaining that he had not raped and murdered Helen Bass.The lawyers who handled Mr. Barnes's final federal appeals, Mike Charlton, Philip Wischkaemper and Gary Taylor, were so certain of his innocence that they spent a good portion of their own money investigating his case.But like all death row inmates, once Mr. Barnes had entered the post-conviction phase, the burden was on him to prove not just that he was innocent, but that there had been constitutional errors in his case. It is extremely difficult to prove either one.Mr. Barnes's two court-appointed trial lawyers had done almost no investigation, Mr. Charlton said. They had not hired any scientific experts to look at the blood and semen that the prosecution said linked Mr. Barnes to the murder. And they only interviewed a few witnesses, he said.One of Mr. Barnes's trial lawyers had handled only one capital murder trial. The other lawyer had also handled one previous case, as a prosecutor.Police said Mr. Barnes had killed Ms. Bass, a 42-year-old nurse who was his mother's best friend, by bludgeoning her with a rifle butt and another heavy object, stabbing her and shooting her in the head. Semen found inside Ms. Bass matched that of Mr. Barnes. A fingerprint on a lamp, which police said may have been used to beat her, also belonged to Mr. Barnes. In addition, one dime-sized spot of blood on a pair of Mr. Barnes's coveralls, which the police had seized from his brother's car, matched that of Ms. Bass.Mr. Sutton said the state's case against Mr. Barnes was strong. But Mr. Charlton and his partners challenged the state's case  by establishing that Mr. Barnes had had a consensual sexual relationship with Ms. Bass. Mr. Barnes had told his lawyers that from the beginning, but they had apparently not listened, Mr. Charlton said.Bob Burtman of The Houston Press conducted an investigation of the 1991 murder, and the newspaper published a lengthy article in January that raised doubts about Mr. Barnes's guilt. Mr. Burtman found a letter Mr. Barnes had written in 1994 to his state habeas lawyer, saying that he had not raped Ms. Bass, that they had had a sexual relationship. Mr. Barnes said they had had sex two or three days before the murder.In addition to their sexual relationship, Mr. Barnes helped Ms. Bass with repairs around the house, and was a frequent visitor. That could have explained the fingerprint on the lamp, Mr. Charlton said. And while the prosecution had maintained that Ms. Bass had bought the lamp a week before  her death -- an assertion that went unchallenged at trial -- Mr. Barnes's final team of lawyers learned from Ms. Bass's son that the lamp was seven or eight years old.The tiny spot of blood on Mr. Barnes's coveralls was analyzed by Kevin Ballard, a leading forensic chemist who is a consultant to the F.B.I. The state had already run DNA tests confirming that the blood was Ms. Bass's. Mr. Ballard concluded that it contained extremely high levels of citric acid, which is used in vials to preserve blood. He said that the blood had either been planted or dropped accidentally on Mr. Barnes's coveralls.In addition to the new forensic evidence, Mr. Charlton and his partners interviewed new witnesses who contradicted all the testimony put on by the state at trial. The lawyers also found that the Wichita Falls Police  had botched the crime scene investigation, failing, among other things, to preserve a shoe print found at the scene and to test blood smeared all over the house.The federal and state courts both refused to allow Mr. Barnes's lawyers to present their new evidence. Finally, the United States Supreme Court refused to intervene.Correction:  June 17, 2000, Saturday  A related article that day, about five cases that resulted in executions, referred incorrectly to the trial lawyer for James Lee Beathard, who was executed in 1999. The lawyer was retained, not appointed.The article included an erroneous tally from the parole board for its vote in the case of Troy Farris, who was also executed in 1999. Five members, not seven, voted for clemency.Correction: June 17, 2000, SaturdayA related article that day, about five cases that resulted in executions, referred incorrectly to the trial lawyer for James Lee Beathard, who was executed in 1999. The lawyer was retained, not appointed.The article included an erroneous tally from the parole board for its vote in the case of Troy Farris, who was also executed in 1999. Five members, not seven, voted for clemency.<br><br>
Gov. George W. Bush is certain that the 127 people who have been executed in Texas during his tenure were all guilty.''I'm confident that every person that has been put to death in Texas, under my watch, has been guilty of the crime charged, and has had full access to the courts,'' Mr. Bush said on the NBC News program ''Meet the Press'' in February.Gov. George W. Bush is certain that the 127 people who have been executed in Texas during his tenure were all guilty.''I'm confident that every person that has been put to death in Texas, under my watch, has been guilty of the crime charged, and has had full access to the courts,'' Mr. Bush said on the NBC News program ''Meet the Press'' in February.But here in Texas, which under Mr. Bush has executed more people than any other state, some of the officials who administer the death penalty, reviewing the case records, considering inmates' appeals and weighing final pleas for clemency, are not so sanguine. These officials, who support Mr. Bush's presidential candidacy and believe in the death penalty, said in interviews that they believed Texas ran the risk of executing an innocent person.''I believe in the death penalty and I don't want to do anything that will cause George Bush to lose the election,'' said Paddy Lann Burwell, a retired Exxon manager who was appointed by the governor two years ago to the Texas Board of Pardons and Paroles, which reviews all clemency requests in capital cases and makes recommendations to the governor. Still, in an interview at his cattle ranch outside Westhof, south of Austin, Mr. Burwell voiced concerns about the fairness of the state's judicial system, particularly several cases in which he said prosecutors seemed more concerned with scoring victories, in the form of capital convictions, than with justice.Over all, Mr. Burwell said, he thinks the system is conscientiously administered. ''But I worry that we may execute an innocent person,'' he said. ''Any person would know that is a possibility. I think our system needs to be improved.''Another member of the board, Tom Moss, a retired federal parole officer, talked about his vote for clemency for Troy Farris, who was executed for killing a police officer. The Farris case, Mr. Moss said, was one of two cases in which he ''saw something that may have indicated that they were innocent.''Cynthia Tauss, who has studied law, is also on the board. She said she ''cried all day'' after Texas executed Mr. Farris. ''I wasn't sure he should have been given the death penalty,'' she said. ''That's why I voted to commute.'' A majority of the 18-member board would have to have voted for clemency in order to make a recommendation of it to Mr. Bush.Charles Baird, a judge on the Texas Court of Criminal Appeals until 1998, was in Washington this week to announce the formation of a national committee to prevent wrongful executions. Asked whether he agreed with Mr. Bush that no one had been wrongfully executed under his watch, Mr. Baird said:  ''Everyone in Texas hopes and prays that that's the case. I do not share his view.'' For such certainty to exist, he added, ''You have to take the position that this very fallible system has worked flawlessly.''Mr. Baird, along with other judges, law enforcement officials and death penalty lawyers, agrees that some of the conditions that have created doubt elsewhere and have sent innocent people to death row in other states -- especially bad lawyers, a lack of resources for lawyers to mount a vigorous defense and overzealous prosecutors -- exist in abundance in Texas. The state also has endemic problems, including elected judges who are under political pressure to mete out the death penalty and a speeded-up appeals process with a low reversal rate, which trouble some officials and experts.A System's Built-in RisksNo one can point with certainty to a case in which an innocent person has been executed here since Texas reinstated the death penalty in 1976. Death penalty lawyers say it is almost impossible to prove a dead man was innocent; once a person is executed, crucial evidence that might prove innocence disappears and lawyers and investigators want to put their resources into trying to save clients who are still on death row.But a close look by The New York Times at a half dozen executions carried out during Governor Bush's tenure -- including interviews with jurors, prosecutors, judges, witnesses and co-defendants still on death row -- makes clear that a legal and judicial system rife with these conditions creates, at the very least, the risk of an innocent person being sent to death row. Although most of the officials interviewed said they believed that the executed men were guilty, they questioned aspects of the legal system that sent them to their deaths.Across the country there have been 87 exonerations in the last 27 years, more than a third of them in the last seven years. These cases have prompted a growing national concern over executions. In January, Gov. George Ryan of Illinois, a Republican who supports the death penalty, announced a moratorium on executions while a thorough review is conducted of the state's criminal justice system. Mr. Ryan, who is Mr. Bush's state campaign chairman, described his state's system, where 13 death row inmates have been exonerated since 1987, 11 of them since 1994, as ''fraught with error.''Seven death row inmates were exonerated in Texas from 1983 to 1997 after evidence of witnesses who had lied, mistaken eyewitnesses and prosecutorial misconduct led to the discovery of their innocence.In the last year, 13 states have had bills pending that would have halted executions. Asked on ''Meet the Press'' if he would consider following the lead of Governor Ryan, Mr. Bush said he would not. Asked why he thought Mr. Ryan had taken the action, Mr. Bush answered: ''Maybe they've had some problems in their courts. Maybe they've had some faulty judgments.''Governor Bush declined an interview request for this article. His top criminal justice policy adviser, Johnny Sutton, answered questions about Mr. Bush's criminal justice record and some specific capital cases in a lengthy telephone interview.''We have to deal with the harsh reality of the death penalty and we take that responsibility very seriously,'' said Mr. Sutton, a former prosecutor. ''This is probably the most important thing we do in state government. The governor takes it very seriously.''Despite glaring examples of bad lawyering at the trial level in Texas, including at least three widely publicized cases of lawyers who have slept through the proceedings, the state appeals court has reversed only eight death penalty cases in the last five years, while affirming the convictions and death sentences in 256 cases, according to court statistics. This is the lowest reversal rate in capital cases in the country. In contrast, Florida, which ranks behind Texas with the nation's third-highest death row population, has a 50 percent reversal rate. Illinois's rate is nearly 30 percent.In the Farris case, the one that caused Ms. Tauss of the parole commission to break down into tears, the Court of Criminal Appeals said there was no forensic evidence to link Mr. Farris to the crime or to support the testimony of the two key witnesses against him. But the appeals court upheld the jury's decision.Then, in an unusual move, seven members of the state parole board voted for clemency, but 10 opposed it and one abstained. Mr. Farris was executed in January 1999. During Mr. Bush's tenure, the parole board has granted clemency to only one death row inmate, according to the board's statistics; as of the end of April, it had rejected 68 clemency petitions.Texas Leads in ExecutionsSince George W. Bush took office in 1995, Texas has put to death more than twice as many people as the next state, Virginia, with 52, and more than all the executions put together in the next four states -- Missouri with 31, Oklahoma with 21, South Carolina with 20 and Arizona with 18. Texas has 12 executions scheduled for May and June. The state has 462 people on death row, second only to California, with 561 death row inmates (California, in contrast, has executed 8 people). Ann W. Richards, the liberal Democratic governor who preceded Mr. Bush, presided over the executions of a then-record 50 death row inmates.Unlike juries in many states, those in Texas do not have the option of life without parole.Mr. Bush has been praised by victims' rights groups. ''The families of victims want resolution,'' said Dianne Clements, the president of one group in Houston, Justice for All. Her 13-year-old son Zachary was killed nine years ago in an accidental shooting.But the sheer number of executions in Texas, a fiercely pro-death-penalty state, has attracted criticism. The cases of two Texas death row inmates, David Spence and Odell Barnes, drew considerable national attention around the time of their executions (Mr. Spence was sent to his death in 1997, Mr. Barnes two months ago). Questions about their innocence were raised by their lawyers and news organizations. In the Spence case, one of the state's investigators expressed doubt after the trial about Mr. Spence's involvement in the murder for which he was convicted. In the Barnes case, there were questions about forensic evidence. There were accusations of police misconduct in both cases.Other cases examined by The New York Times also raise lingering questions of possible innocence. More broadly, the cases expose systemic failings in the administration of the death penalty in Texas.One of those failings is a pattern of overzealous prosecution. In the case of James Lee Beathard, for example, who was executed in 1999, the prosecutor, in a subsequent trial, branded the chief witness against Mr. Beathard a liar and offered a different version of who committed the murders.A lack of legal resources available to murder defendants in Texas may have sealed the fate of David Castillo, an impoverished high school dropout, who was convicted of murdering a liquor store owner.  Mr. Castillo's defense was hampered by the court's refusal to give him an additional $600 for an investigator, and his court-appointed lawyers failed to prepare character witnesses who might have persuaded the jury to spare his life. He was executed in September 1998.Last year, Governor Bush vetoed a modest indigent defense bill that its backers said would have improved the quality of representation in criminal cases. It would have given counties the authority to set up public defender offices, which only a handful now have, and curbed the power of judges to appoint their friends and campaign contributors to represent indigents. For a small-town practitioner, these appointments can be a lucrative source of income; to remain in the good graces of the judges who dole them out, some lawyers feel bound to move cases quickly. The bill would also have required that a lawyer be appointed within 20 days after a person is arraigned. There is no limit now.Explaining his veto at the time, Mr. Bush said, among other things, that the bill would not improve legal counsel for the poor. Asked about the bill on ''Meet the Press,'' Mr. Bush said he could not remember it, though he insisted that he was ''for public defenders.''Texas also puts a premium on the speed of its executions, aided by an appeals court that rarely overturns capital cases and a clemency board that has voted only once to stop an execution.This emphasis on speed hurt Jerry Lee Hogue. Although there was strong evidence, including two eyewitnesses, that he had committed the arson-murder for which he was convicted, on the eve of his scheduled execution nearly 20 years later a law enforcement official had gnawing doubts. The official, Joseph Stewart, an arson investigator in Wichita Falls, arrested a man for a different arson who it turned out had been at the arson for which Mr. Hogue had been convicted. The arsons seemed disturbingly similar, Mr. Stewart said in an interview, and he called Governor Bush's office several times, pleading for a reprieve of 30 days in order to pursue the new evidence.''I'm not a defense lawyer, I'm a Texas peace officer,'' said Mr. Stewart, a death penalty supporter who has voted for Mr. Bush and has been in law enforcement since he was 21. For this reason he thought Governor Bush would listen to him. He was wrong.Mr. Sutton said that the governor had rejected Mr. Stewart's entreaties because ''the jury decision was right.'' The execution of Mr. Hogue on March 11, 1998, left Mr. Stewart with grave doubts about how the death penalty is administered. ''Being in law enforcement, I am not against the death penalty,'' he said in an interview in the county building in tiny Crowell. ''I had always assumed there was a good set of checks and balances. I was pretty disillusioned afterward.''A Blow to Death Row InmatesSince 1995, the state has appointed all death row inmates' lawyers for post-conviction review. But the Court of Criminal Appeals controls the list of those lawyers, and many highly qualified death penalty lawyers are not on it. There are numerous instances of court-appointed lawyers missing crucial deadlines and filing habeas petitions that raise few if any legal arguments.Mr. Baird, who served on the appeals court from 1989 to 1998 and reviewed hundreds of death penalty cases, said, ''Even in cases where the lawyers did care and worked hard to represent their clients, they were not given the resources necessary to make that representation effective.'' Mr. Baird, a Democrat, was defeated in his bid for re-election to the court and is now teaching law.Until 1996, death row inmates in Texas had access to a federally financed resource center, whose lawyers handled post-conviction appeals, helped pro bono firms with those appeals, and monitored all death cases in the system to make sure that everyone had a lawyer. The Texas resource center, which helped several death row inmates gain exoneration, closed after Congress eliminated its financing.Elisabeth Semel, who directs the American Bar Association's Death Penalty Representation Project, finances two lawyers for the nonprofit Texas Defender Service, but she said that her effort cannot begin to make up for the loss of the resource center.Other states provide considerable resources to death row inmates seeking to prove their innocence. Most states, for example, have post-conviction offices. Illinois put state money into a post-conviction office after its federal resource center closed. Illinois also has a tradition of private law firms working pro bono on capital cases. In addition, a journalism class at Northwestern University specializes in investigating the innocence claims of death row inmates. With this system in place, evidence has been uncovered that has led to the exonerations of 13 death row inmates in Illinois since 1987.Parole Board CriticizedThe Texas pardons and paroles board, another institution that is supposed to safeguard against the execution of the innocent, has been criticized for the fact that it meets in private, votes by fax and is not required to give reasons for decisions. The board members are appointed by the governor to six-year terms.Ruling on a lawsuit filed by death row inmates in December 1988, Judge Sam Sparks of the Federal District Court in Austin called the board's procedures ''appalling,'' and held that they barely met the minimal procedural safeguards required by the United States Constitution.''The board would not have to sacrifice its conservative ideology to carry out its duties in a more fair and accurate fashion,'' the judge ruled. The judge said it was up to the Texas Legislature to make any changes. Governor Bush said he saw no need for a change.Perhaps because the rate of clemency is so low, lawyers may not always put their full energies into applying for it, said a former lawyer in the governor's general counsel office from 1989 to 1998, Jim Sallans, who reviewed hundreds of clemency petitions in capital cases. He said he ''supports the way Governor Bush handles clemency in capital cases,'' and he said he had no doubt that all those executed under the governor were guilty.But he faulted the preparation of many clemency petitions and the quality of legal representation for some death row inmates making their final pleas for mercy. ''Too many clemency petitions were hastily prepared, and poorly written,'' Mr. Sallans said. ''The attorneys would often call up and ask us for a response, and we would politely tell them that we were doing our best with what little they had submitted.''Governor Bush, who has never witnessed an execution, weighs all clemency petitions, as well as all other cases set for execution, sometimes several days, or more, before an  execution, sometimes the morning of the lethal injection. His powers to act are limited by the recommendations of the parole board, except that he may grant a 30-day reprieve on his own. He has never done so.Finally, unlike many other states, there is no office in Texas that systematically tracks the cases of the nearly 500 condemned inmates. As the pace of executions quickens, with 20 scheduled to die over the next four months, the handful of death penalty lawyers struggle to keep abreast of as many cases as possible.One of them is Maurie Levin, who runs a one-person branch of the Texas Defender Service in Austin that handles death penalty appeals, with financing from the American Bar Association's Death Penalty Representation Project.''Reporters keep calling, asking, 'Got an  innocence case?' '' Ms. Levin said the other day. She threw up her hands in frustration. ''How would we know?''Correction:  June 17, 2000, Saturday  An article on May 14 about executions in Texas during the tenure of Gov. George W. Bush misstated the year in which a federal judge in Austin ruled that the Texas pardons and paroles board barely met minimal procedural safeguards required by the United States Constitution. It was 1998, not 1988.A related article that day, about five cases that resulted in executions, referred incorrectly to the trial lawyer for James Lee Beathard, who was executed in 1999. The lawyer was retained, not appointed.The article included an erroneous tally from the parole board for its vote in the case of Troy Farris, who was also executed in 1999. Five members, not seven, voted for clemency.Correction: June 17, 2000, SaturdayAn article on May 14 about executions in Texas during the tenure of Gov. George W. Bush misstated the year in which a federal judge in Austin ruled that the Texas pardons and paroles board barely met minimal procedural safeguards required by the United States Constitution. It was 1998, not 1988.A related article that day, about five cases that resulted in executions, referred incorrectly to the trial lawyer for James Lee Beathard, who was executed in 1999. The lawyer was retained, not appointed.The article included an erroneous tally from the parole board for its vote in the case of Troy Farris, who was also executed in 1999. Five members, not seven, voted for clemency.<br><br>
It was one of the more astonishing political images of the year: a newspaper advertisement that linked Osama bin Laden, the suspected international terrorist, with Senator Spencer Abraham, the Michigan Republican.Why is the senator, asked the advertisement that ran in some of Michigan's largest newspapers, ''trying to make it easier for terrorists like Osama bin Laden to export their way of terror to any street in America?''It was one of the more astonishing political images of the year: a newspaper advertisement that linked Osama bin Laden, the suspected international terrorist, with Senator Spencer Abraham, the Michigan Republican.Why is the senator, asked the advertisement that ran in some of Michigan's largest newspapers, ''trying to make it easier for terrorists like Osama bin Laden to export their way of terror to any street in America?''The question not only puzzled readers, but the advertising campaign, sponsored by a Washington-based group that regularly inveighs against any form of immigration, the Federation for American Immigration Reform, also infuriated institutions like the Michigan Catholic Conference, the voice of the state's seven Roman Catholic dioceses on social and political issues.''It has been real ugly and I think very vicious,'' said Paul A. Long, vice president for public policy of the conference, which asked television stations around the state to stop broadcasting anti-immigration spots sponsored by the federation. ''We felt compelled to speak out.''The federation's advertisements -- which include television and radio spots that warn viewers and listeners that immigration legislation sponsored by Mr. Abraham would ''import more than 200,000 foreign workers a year to take good American jobs'' -- are among the nastiest running anywhere this political season. They are also an extreme example of a trend that is changing the face of political advertising: the increasing insertion of special-interest groups into the process as masters of the attack.Just last week, for instance, Handgun Control, the antithesis of the National Rifle Association, began running a spot in eight cities around the country that implied that the N.R.A. would work out of the Oval Office if Gov. George W. Bush should be elected president.Groups as well known as the Sierra Club and individuals as obscure as the Republican campaign donors Sam and Charles Wyly -- they of the attack commercial on Senator John McCain's environmental record -- are on the air with spots leveling ominous accusations about Republican and Democratic candidates alike.Two weeks ago, in fact, the Sierra Club began running commercials in 17 Congressional races across the nation, about evenly divided between candidates it considers good for the environment and those it views as bad, including Mr. Abraham.''Interest-group ads have been a growth industry ever since 'Harry and Louise' appeared in '93 and '94,'' said Darrell West, a Brown University political science professor who studies campaign advertising. Harry and Louise were the ubiquitous television couple in the insurance industry spots that helped kill the Clinton administration's national health care proposals.''Since that time, we have seen a virtual explosion of interest-group ads,'' Professor West said, adding that the groups sometimes serve as surrogates for candidates, who, at a time when voters are prone to punish office-seekers for seeming too negative, cannot afford to be perceived as attacking an opponent.''This decade, candidates have been less likely to employ attack ads for fear of the backlash,'' he said. ''The groups can provide a candidate with a level of insulation.''The Michigan Senate race is a microcosm of the trend. So far, the only significant television advertising in the race has been by organizations ostensibly unaffiliated with either political party, including the A.F.L.-C.I.O., the Sierra Club, Michigan Right to Life and a business group called Americans for Job Security. Mr. Abraham, engaged in what polls show is a tight race, and  his Democratic opponent, Representative Debbie Stabenow, have yet to begin advertising in any concerted way.And then there is the Federation for American Immigration Reform, known by its acronym, FAIR. The Catholic Church was condemning a  $700,000 advertising campaign that the federation describes as an effort to defeat the immigration legislation sponsored by Mr. Abraham. But  many people here view the federation's effort as a virulent campaign to defeat the senator himself in the fall election. Mr. Abraham, a first-term senator of Lebanese descent, is  chairman of a Senate subcommittee on immigration.At least one television station, a Fox Network affiliate in Detroit, pulled a federation commercial.The nonprofit federation, founded in the late 1970's by Dr. John Tanton, an ophthalmologist from northern Michigan, has long viewed a ban on immigration as the key to population control. It advocates a moratorium on all immigration, with the exceptions of spouses and children of American citizens, and ''a limited number of refugees.''The group, which claims a dues-paying membership of 70,000, has attracted a smorgasbord of support from both the left and the right, and had been running harshly anti-immigration commercials on radio and television in high-visibility primary states like Iowa and South Carolina.(Former Gov. Dick Lamm of Colorado, a Democrat, is on the federation's board of directors. Former Senator Alan K. Simpson of Wyoming, a Republican, resigned from the advisory board over the federation's Michigan advertising campaign.)''They've always been controversial,'' said Frank Sharry, executive director of the National Immigration Forum, a Washington advocacy group for immigrants. ''Their work has always been surrounded by accusations of racism and white supremacy.''What often raises hackles about the federation is its past financial backing from the Pioneer Fund, an organization formed in the 1930's in part to promote racial purity.Dan Stein, the federation's executive director, says the group long ago severed its connections with the Pioneer Fund, and that the purpose of the Michigan television and radio spots and print advertisements is to educate Mr. Abraham's constituents about the issues, not the election. One of the commercials' objectives is the defeat of a bill sponsored by Mr. Abraham that would increase the number of visas granted to foreigners seeking to work for high-tech companies, which complain of a shortage of skilled applicants.In its television spot, the federation characterized the measure as a threat to American college graduates, and urged constituents to call the senator on a toll-free number that the group arranged to have connected to Mr. Abraham's Washington office.''We are a charitable entity,'' Mr. Stein said. ''We are not interested in affecting the campaign.''The Abraham camp thinks otherwise. ''Their goal is to defeat Abraham and show his colleagues what they can do,'' said Joe McMonigle, the senator's campaign manager.As a nonprofit charity whose donors can receive tax deductions, the federation is permitted to engage in lobbying but is barred by the Internal Revenue Service from campaigning for or against political candidates, legal experts say. (The Sierra Club has more leeway in campaigns.  It is also a nonprofit group but the money it receives from donors is not tax deductible.)Doug Varley, a lawyer in the Washington offices of Caplin & Drysdale who advises tax-exempt and nonprofit organizations, including Mr. Sharry's, said, ''I think most charities try very hard to comply with the electioneering ban. Most are scrupulous, because the stakes are so high.''Mr. Stein maintained that his commercials do not cross the line. ''We have the ability and the right to engage in grass-roots lobbying,'' he said. ''Unless your ad says 'Vote against Abraham,' you're really on terra firma.''The federation's advertising has become an issue in the Michigan race, but which of the candidates will benefit remains unclear. Ms. Stabenow has told reporters that while she disagrees with the shrillness of the federation's commercials on immigration, she feels the group raises a legitimate issue for debate.The federation said it was not working with Ms. Stabenow.Mr. McMonigle, meanwhile, said that he has had to devote a lot of time to alerting the news media to the group's background and refuting its accusations.Ed Sarpolus, a pollster with EPIC/ MRA in Lansing, said the federation might be doing some damage to Mr. Abraham simply by its ability to distract his campaign. ''It has taken Spence off message and strategy,'' he said, adding that his latest poll showed the two candidates in a virtual dead heat.
After Furor Over Book, A Welcome EpilogueThe obvious question: in her cheerful new life as a teacher at a Queens school with students from 40 cultures, does Ruth Sherman, known for teaching a book called ''Nappy Hair'' to a class in Brooklyn, still use the book? Do her new students learn about the little girl with ''the nappiest, the fuzziest, the most screwed up, squeezed up, knotted up'' hair in the world? Or did the threats from parents that caused the white teacher to change schools keep her from teaching what she had hoped would be a diversity-affirming book?Well, Ms. Sherman, 29, does not teach the book by Carolivia Herron that caused such controversy back in 1998. Not yet, at least.After Furor Over Book, A Welcome EpilogueThe obvious question: in her cheerful new life as a teacher at a Queens school with students from 40 cultures, does Ruth Sherman, known for teaching a book called ''Nappy Hair'' to a class in Brooklyn, still use the book? Do her new students learn about the little girl with ''the nappiest, the fuzziest, the most screwed up, squeezed up, knotted up'' hair in the world? Or did the threats from parents that caused the white teacher to change schools keep her from teaching what she had hoped would be a diversity-affirming book?Well, Ms. Sherman, 29, does not teach the book by Carolivia Herron that caused such controversy back in 1998. Not yet, at least.''That's not because I have anything against it,'' she said, adding that the book is still in her library. ''I haven't gotten a chance to do a unit like that yet.''Some parents at Public School 75 in Bushwick objected to her use of the book, and, calling her a racist, threatened her.In her new school, Ms. Sherman, who got married in the meantime and enjoys the relative anonymity of her new name, has not looked into teaching other books that might ruffle feathers. ''I do second-guess everything now,'' she said.The controversy also affected her teaching style. ''I was extremely open-minded before, and I'd look through a child's eyes. Now I think, 'This one might be insulted, this one has a little bit of an attitude about this,' '' she said. ''Something as simple as a child's book might offend someone, which is something I never thought about before. It is a learning experience.''Now, I will do anything in my power not to insult or disrespect anybody.''Her new school in Jamaica Estates feels like home now. ''I joke around all the time, I want a T-shirt that says 'I died and went to P.S. 131,' '' she said. ''It's heaven here.''New Strategy in Game Of Duck, Duck, GooseThey've tried shaking them. They've tried baking them. They've tried spraying the home fields with goose-repelling grape juice. Now, they've added three border collies with a fervent work ethic. And still, it's a dead heat in the continuing battle of Canada Geese vs. the People of Clarkstown.For a while there, the score was tilted in favor of the People, in their attempts to rid their grassy areas of goose droppings. In 1996 and 1997, Clarkstown, in Rockland County, got permission from the state to round up a total of 451 geese and convert them to gooseburgers for the homeless and elderly. But in 1996, the meat was contaminated, and in 1997, the elderly complained that it was tough. In all, the plan wasn't worth the hassle. It reduced the number of nests in the parks, but it brought out animal rights demonstrators, and people complained that new geese would move in to replace the cooked ones.The town is now resorting to an earlier goose-fighting technique, addling eggs by shaking them and piercing them, so they will not hatch. And now, dogs belonging to Mary Felegy of Fair Game Goose Management Services patrol the town's parks daily, running and swimming after the birds.There is less ''goose grease'' in the parks, said Charles Holbrook, the Clarkstown supervisor. ''The dogs keep the geese off the park property, which is good, but in reality they're just chasing them to someone else's property, so it's not really a solution,'' he said. And it costs $36,000 to chase the geese, but only $10,000 to catch them and prepare the meat, he added.But Ms. Felegy said the parks were cleaner now. ''It's safe to sit on the grass,'' she said, ''it's safe to slide into home base, and you can bounce your basketball on the court without it coming up covered in green, slimy goo.''TINA KELLEY
After decades of caricature as the most self-indulgent and permissive generation in American history, baby boomers -- including Al Gore and George W. Bush -- are realizing it is time to get with the program.Despite their differences in political orientation, the two parties' presidential candidates, both of whom were born into the vanguard of the boomer generation, are delivering the same message on the campaign trail: ''responsibility.'' It is a message that goes to the personal and the political and speaks, the candidates hope, to a generation once famous for its idealism and its determination to do the right thing.After decades of caricature as the most self-indulgent and permissive generation in American history, baby boomers -- including Al Gore and George W. Bush -- are realizing it is time to get with the program.Despite their differences in political orientation, the two parties' presidential candidates, both of whom were born into the vanguard of the boomer generation, are delivering the same message on the campaign trail: ''responsibility.'' It is a message that goes to the personal and the political and speaks, the candidates hope, to a generation once famous for its idealism and its determination to do the right thing.Moreover, the campaigns have sensed a new wrinkle, so to speak, in the ever-scrutinized lives of the boomers that has emerged as they have aged -- the oldest boomers are now in the unusual position of contemplating their own retirements even as their parents are living longer and requiring more care. At the same time, some, like Mr. Gore, whose mother is 87 and whose mother-in-law lives with him and his wife, are even becoming grandparents.This nexus of life-defining events for the biggest cohort in American history (the 76 million people born between 1946 and 1964) has infused the presidential campaign with a new urgency, especially regarding Social Security and health care. Both  Mr. Bush and Mr. Gore have devoted much time on the campaign trail to Social Security and both plan to deliver major addresses on the topic on Monday.''It's a response to what's happening in society,'' said John Rother, director of legislation and public policy for AARP, one of the biggest and most effective lobbying groups in the country. ''It's driven by demographics, the economy and technology. There's a growing awareness, particularly of people who are Bush's and Gore's age, that their parent's generation is becoming frail, we don't have support systems that are in very good shape, and the anxiety about your own retirement is on the top of people's minds.''Al Gore was born March 31, 1948, making him 52. George W. Bush was born July 6, 1946, making him 53. And while they had different coming-of-age experiences during the 1960's and 1970's -- Mr. Gore was closer to the counterculture than was Mr. Bush, but still by no means a radical -- both are invoking their generational roots as themes in their campaigns and are developing ''responsibility'' as rationales for their candidacies.This campaign marks one of the few times that candidates from both parties have been so close in age. For the first two baby boomers are running for president, representing a definitive break with the World War II era. Given the unprecedented prosperity, these factors give the nation a chance to reset its compass and restructure its priorities.Here was Governor Bush in a recent interview with ''The News Hour'' on PBS:''I'm a strong candidate because I come from the baby boomer generation, recognizing that we've got to usher in an era of responsible behavior, which starts with behaving responsibly in the office.''Here was Vice President Gore at a fund-raiser Thursdayin Los Angeles, explaining the strong economy:''We got rid of the politics of illusion and said to the American people: 'We have got to make the real hard choices. We have to accept responsibility for our own future.' That's why it was so tough to pass the changes that have helped to unleash all this potential. Tough, tough, tough.''Mark Mellman, a Democratic pollster, says the invocation of responsibility is a harkening to fundamental values.''The notion that people ought to be responsible for their actions is one of the top-most widely shared values in this country,'' he said. ''So it's no surprise that politicians talk in that idiom.''But there is also a strong degree of self-interest in their appeals, particularly when it comes to issues like Social Security and Medicare. Politicians used to focus issues like Social Security and Medicare solely on the over-65 crowd. But now, Mr. Mellman noted, ''people are worried about taking care of their parents, and the leading edge of the baby boom are worried about their own retirement and some are worried about both at the same time, which is a newer phenomenon.''A political focus group of mostly middle-aged people conducted earlier this month in Bala Cynwyd, a suburb of Philadelphia, by Peter Hart, a Democratic pollster, found unanimity on one subject -- despite the prosperous economy, people are anxious about health care and Social Security.''As baby boomers get older, people start to feel it as well as think it,'' Frank Ratel, 60, an accountant, said during the focus group.Mr. Rother of AARP said: ''The assumption among many people is that it's only seniors who care about Medicare and Social Security, but nothing could be further from the truth. Our polling shows it is boomers who are the most interested in prescription drug coverage because you're thinking about your mom and at the same time wondering about your own future. When you're in your 50's, you don't know what kind of shape you're going to be in. This is a greater concern of people in their 50's than it is for people 65 and older.''The crunch for baby boomers is becoming increasingly obvious. Almost 50 percent of the people who filed for bankruptcy in 1999 were baby boomers. Some academics, like Elizabeth Warren, a bankruptcy expert at Harvard Law School, argue that, contrary to the popular image of affluent boomers spending their way to consumer heaven, this is ''the most vulnerable generation'' because of the confluence of potential failures that they face, from the loss of a job to catastrophic illness to the effects of divorce and the need to care for aging parents.The likelihood of bankruptcy increases with age, as those facing retirement face mounting costs, particularly for prescription drugs and long-term care. Both Mr. Gore and Mr. Bush are offering proposals to help people meet these needs.The Social Security system has a surplus now, but the government predicts that the trust fund will begin paying out more than it takes in by 2015 as the baby boom generation retires. Without a major fix, the system could go broke by 2037.But for both candidates, the notion of ''responsibility'' goes beyond strengthening Social Security, which they would do by different means.Mr. Bush emphasizes personal responsibility as a direct counterweight to what he perceives as the irresponsibility of President Clinton (the first baby boomer president). The goal of his candidacy, Mr. Bush says, is to restore honor and dignity to the White House.And the signal inherent in his message is an appeal to family values, long seen as Republican turf.Mr. Bush has emphasized the theme since he began his campaign last June, saying ''My first goal is to usher in the responsibility era -- an era that stands in stark contrast to the last few decades, where our culture has said: If it feels good, do it, and if you've got a problem, blame someone else.''Mr. Bush has also used his emphasis on compassion to temper any impression that responsibility means harshness or sacrifice.For Mr. Gore, responsibility is a multipurpose concept, and he tends to use it both subliminally and overtly. He too is trying to distance himself from the actions of President Clinton. But he also wants to present himself as the logical successor to Mr. Clinton as the steward of the nation's current prosperity, and so he offers himself as the responsible heir apparent.This, of course, necessitates presenting Mr. Bush as the ''irresponsible'' alternative, a neat way, learned from President Clinton, of transforming a policy matter into a values judgment. Repeatedly, Mr. Gore casts Mr. Bush's proposals as ''reckless,'' a quality Mr. Gore conjures up with his relentless referencing to Mr. Bush's ''risky tax scheme.'' The contrast between the responsible Mr. Gore and the irresponsible Mr. Bush has fast become the organizing principle of the Gore campaign.Like Mr. Bush, Mr. Gore is using the idea of responsibility to reinforce one of the basic tenets of his party. While Mr. Bush's reference summons family values, Mr. Gore's highlights the Democrats' traditional advantage on preserving entitlement programs. The ''risky tax scheme'' that he invokes is a direct threat to two tenets of Democratic orthodoxy -- Social Security and Medicare -- that baby boomers are now either depending on to help their parents or expecting to receive themselves.''It references the basic policy dilemma of his presidency,'' said  Elaine Kamark, Mr. Gore's chief domestic policy adviser. ''The challenge has gone from how to manage the insolvency of these programs to who can keep control of the surplus. The money guys on Wall Street understand this very well. They want confidence. You get it by running a straight, sound fiscal policy.''Because Mr. Gore had children relatively early for his generation, he is now a grandparent. ''His life cycle is slightly ahead of his generation, so he can see ahead to the centrality of some of these issues,'' Ms. Kamark said. Still, Mr. Gore is more a creature of the popular image of the baby boom than is Mr. Bush.Mr. Bush exudes a more retro 1950's youth, one of hijinks and drinking and frat parties, remarkably detached from the Vietnam War or any kind of rebellion or existential angst. As he told an interviewer for GQ: ''I don't remember any kind of heaviness ruining my time at Yale.''The vice president seems much more a product of his time. He invariably dangles his boomer credentials before his audiences, mentioning the touchstones of his generation -- the assassinations, the civil rights  movement, Vietnam, Watergate, his ''disillusionment with politics,'' though never rebellion, and his admission that he smoked marijuana.
Democratic Trouble In Broward CountyFlorida looks like Bush country. The presidential preference polls there have Gov. George W. Bush of Texas leading Vice President Al Gore by half a dozen points or more. One reason: George W.'s brother Jeb is the Sunshine State's governor.Democratic Trouble In Broward CountyFlorida looks like Bush country. The presidential preference polls there have Gov. George W. Bush of Texas leading Vice President Al Gore by half a dozen points or more. One reason: George W.'s brother Jeb is the Sunshine State's governor.But Mr. Gore says he nevertheless intends to compete for Florida's big trove of electoral votes. And he insists he has a good shot.Maybe. Or maybe he's just bluffing.Whatever the case, if he is to have any reasonable chance of carrying Florida, he must overwhelmingly carry Broward County, on the state's southeast coast. Broward is Democratic country, home to thousands and thousands of condo-dwelling retirees from the Northeast, particularly the New York area.On election days, they vote by the thousands and thousands, spurred to turn out by the county's 40 or so Democratic clubs. In a country and state in which election turnout has dropped to an embarrassing low, Election Day in Broward is a political sight to see.But this year there is trouble in Broward. Rather than concentrating at this point on drumming up support for Mr. Gore, the county's Democratic clubs are locked in a divisive squabble over who is to be chairman of the Council of Presidents, the umbrella organization for the clubs.The problem: Broward is still teeming with retirees. But as in much of the rest of Florida, more and more young people are moving in (including some Republicans, though Democrats still predominate). Some of the new young Democrats think it is time for the Broward old guard to move aside and let them run things, including the Council of Presidents.Last weekend, when they tried to install 40-year-old Randy Fleischer, the head of the county's Young Democrats organization, as Council president, the old guard, many in their 80's, balked and the meeting broke up in an uproar.Another meeting has been called for June and the county's Democratic leader, Mitch Ceasar, is working to cool tempers and restore unity lest Al Gore be the ultimate loser.''The clubs are a critical element in our get-out-the-vote campaign in the fall,'' he warned the other day.Religion in Utah On the High Court?Utah was founded by Mormons. Two of every three residents of the state are Mormons, members of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, and Mormons, most of them conservative Republicans, dominate Utah politics. The Congressional delegation is all Mormon. The state Legislature is predominantly Mormon. The governor, Michael O. Leavitt, is a Mormon.But since 1926, the year when the five justices on the Utah Supreme Court began to be appointed (before that they were elected), the unwritten rule in Utah government has been that at least one non-Mormon would always sit on the high bench.Or at least that was the understanding until February.Then Governor Leavitt broke with tradition. When the sole non-Mormon on the court stepped down, he filled the slot with a Mormon.The Utah Society of Separationists, which tried unsuccessfully in 1993 to persuade the court to forbid opening prayers at governmental meetings, strongly objected to the appointment. But Mr. Leavitt stuck with it.The society's director, Christopher Allen, contends that the court was ''spineless'' when it was dominated by four Mormon justices and henceforth will be even more so. Utah, he argues, is not a state but ''a solid theocracy'' with a theocratic high court.The chief justice, Richard C. Howe, disagrees. He told The Associated Press the other day in a rare interview that he saw nothing wrong with an all-Mormon court, then added:''Whether you belong to one church or another shouldn't make any difference. What we want on this court are men and women of good character and legal ability, and their own private view on religion really doesn't enter into their decisions. There may be an exception once in awhile, but it would be very subtle.''Students Ready To Speak With VotesThe way the freshman class at Northglenn High School in suburban Denver saw it, if Gov. Bill Owens was so dead set on joining the national rush to test students at various grade levels to see if they are learning anything, or their teachers are teaching them anything, he should come in and take the test himself. They sent him an invite. After all, they reasoned, a lot of them oppose assessment tests, along with their teachers, and the Colorado Legislature very well might have rejected the bill that made the tests mandatory had Mr. Owens not bulled it through.The governor didn't bite.Rather, last week he sent back a letter that stung worse than a whack on the hand by a 12-inch ruler.''I am certainly not concerned with my ability to pass a test,'' he wrote, ''but I will certainly not take a test because a group of students -- or others -- demand that I do so. If interest groups feel that I can be threatened, pressured or intimidated, then that is a formula for a weak governor. I will not give in.''But soon enough the sting wore off. And the freshmen, having learned a thing or two, were ready to counter when a reporter from The Rocky Mountain News showed up.''Kind of immature,'' said Kaitlin Hudson.''Setting a really bad example,'' added Brittany Stahl.Whereupon the governor's spokesman, Dick Wadhams, chimed in with some Politics 101.''Can't have it both ways,'' he said. ''If you wade into the public arena and make demands of a public official, then this is the kind of response that might be made.''Lesson learned -- and then some, offered Jessica Quimby.''We won't be threatened, either,'' she said. ''He's just our governor. We'll be turning 18 pretty soon, and if he keeps this up, we'll probably kick him out of office.''Latest Polls Show Bush the WinnerThe Hotline, the popular Internet political tip sheet, keeps a running tab of presidential preference polls in various states as they become available. Last week, 13 polls were added to the list. Here is how things stood over all at the end of last week:Gov. George W. Bush led in 23 states, worth 271 electoral votes. Vice President Al Gore led in 11 states, worth 160 electoral votes.Needed to win: 270 electoral votes.
INTERNATIONAL3-14U.S. Labor Lobbies Hard To Defeat China Trade Bill  The American labor movement is mounting its biggest lobbying campaign ever on trade matters in seeking to defeat the Clinton administration's drive to normalize commerce with China.1INTERNATIONAL3-14U.S. Labor Lobbies Hard To Defeat China Trade Bill  The American labor movement is mounting its biggest lobbying campaign ever on trade matters in seeking to defeat the Clinton administration's drive to normalize commerce with China.1Vatican Reveals Fatima Secret  The Vatican disclosed the so-called third secret of Fatima, which for decades has kept the shrine of the Virgin Mary in Portugal at the center of conspiracy theories and doomsday cults. A Vatican official described the secret as a vision of the 1981 assassination attempt on the pope.1Sierra Leone Slides Back  With the apparent collapse of a nine-month-old peace accord in Sierra Leone, the country is on the verge of slipping back into warlordism, which for years had rendered Sierra Leone a state in name only.14Horn of Africa Fighting  Ethiopia and Eritrea fought along their border for a second day, ignoring appeals from the United Nations Security Council to end the battles.14Japan Embraces the Internet  The Internet is quietly transforming Japan, making celebrities of small farmers, empowering women, changing the way people apply for jobs and schools and generally chipping away at traditional patterns of behavior.1Dutch Explosions Kill 20  A blaze inside a fireworks warehouse set off multiple explosions that killed at least 20 people, wounded 175 more and sent balls of fire shooting over the center of the eastern Dutch town of Enschede.(AP)NATIONAL16-31California Governor Seeks Big Tax Break for Teachers  Gov. Gray Davis of California has proposed to exempt all public school teachers from the state's income tax, in what officials believe is the first such peacetime exemption for any occupation in American history.1Fears About Death Penalty  Texas has executed 127 people during the tenure of Gov. George W. Bush. The governor is certain they all were guilty, but some Texas officials who administer the death penalty say the state runs the risk of executing an innocent person.1Plants to Contain Drugs  Tobacco farmers are seeking to bolster their sagging business by growing plants genetically altered to contain pharmaceuticals.1President Praises March  President Clinton praised the Million Mom March, saying the Washington event will send a message to the nation's gun lobby.16Fire Declared Disaster  President Clinton declared the area affected by the Los Alamos fires to be a ''major disaster.''16Dispute Over Cuban Doctors  A dispute in Florida over the licensing of Cuban doctors is testing the power of Cuban-Americans against the medical establishment.20Long-Awaited Medals of Honor  The Medal of Honor has been awarded to 21 servicemen of Asian descent who fought in World War II.21Interest Groups Attack  A trend is changing the face of political advertising: an increasing number of attack campaigns by special-interest groups.22NEW YORK/REGION33-40Shifting Views of Giuliani As He Confronts Personal Crisis  Over a span of a few days Rudolph W. Giuliani became someone other than the mayor a city thought it knew.33Family Court in Disarray  A growing docket and a dwindling pool of lawyers available to represent the poor have so crippled the New York City Family Court system that judges are forced to adjourn cases repeatedly, according to a report to be released by the city's public advocate.35Fresh Air Fund38OBITUARIES41-42Chess41Weather43Cong. Vote39
AN industry's annual convention, like an anniversary, tends to have a celebratory, somewhat self-congratulatory sheen. And for all that newspapers are prickly institutions, prone alternately to braggadocio and self-doubt, the attendees at the annual publishers' convention in New York last week did exude satisfaction and confidence.Why? After all, newspaper companies' stock prices, as reflected in the Standard & Poor's publishing index, have dropped 16.9 percent from their high at the end of 1999, and are right about where they were at the time of last year's meeting in San Diego of the publishers' group, the Newspaper Association of America. In the same year, dozens of newspaper journalists have deserted print and joined dot-com companies.AN industry's annual convention, like an anniversary, tends to have a celebratory, somewhat self-congratulatory sheen. And for all that newspapers are prickly institutions, prone alternately to braggadocio and self-doubt, the attendees at the annual publishers' convention in New York last week did exude satisfaction and confidence.Why? After all, newspaper companies' stock prices, as reflected in the Standard & Poor's publishing index, have dropped 16.9 percent from their high at the end of 1999, and are right about where they were at the time of last year's meeting in San Diego of the publishers' group, the Newspaper Association of America. In the same year, dozens of newspaper journalists have deserted print and joined dot-com companies.Newsprint prices, next to labor the biggest cost for the factories that are newspapers, are rising as the newsprint companies continue to consolidate and demand from Asia has rebounded. Sunday circulation, the underpinning of the most lucrative advertising of the week for any newspaper, continues its decline. A new breed of print competition, in the form of a free subway-based (and government-sponsored) tabloid, Metro, has started up in Philadelphia and is looking to gain a foothold elsewhere.There is no sign that online rivals for classified advertising are fading.All that is true. But so is something else. Like the European cartographer who made the Lenox Globe 500 years ago, with the Latin inscription ''Here are dragons'' off the east Asian coast, newspaper executives had begun looking at the Internet as terra incognita, an almost mythical place of revenue-devouring, reader-devouring pixels that would cripple their businesses.Now, with three or more years of Internet experience behind them, including both failures and modest successes, when publishers look at the World Wide Web, they don't see business-destroying dragons any more. They see a new breed of competitor, it is true. But they also see themselves. (That, of course, can cut both ways -- newspaper companies like The New York Times Company, Tribune, Knight Ridder and Belo had assembled their Internet assets in a ready form for initial public offerings, only to see the Internet initial offering market go south.)The March measurements of the Web-measurement firm Media Metrix showed newspaper sites holding their own against other general-news sites. That doesn't change the fact that all general news sites are far behind the more utilitarian sites like  Citysearch.com. But even Barry Diller, chairman of USA Networks, which is part owner of Ticketmaster Online-CitySearch, told the publishers in a forum last week that he did not think the Internet ''is going to replace paper.''Meanwhile, the Internet, in the form of dot-com advertising, is driving their old revenue streams to new heights. Coming off a highly successful year in 1999, newspaper advertising revenues at companies like Dow Jones & Company, The New York Times Company, Gannett Company, Belo, and McClatchy are driving strong double-digit revenue gains thus far this year.Asked about the dangers of the Internet, William S. Morris III, chairman and chief executive of Morris Communications and the association's outgoing chairman, said in an interview: ''We can play that game ourselves. We've got reporters going out all over the place getting information. We've got incredible promotional power. We've got a fantastic relationship with our customers -- our advertisers.'' When asked about the swoon in the stock price of Internet companies, he deadpanned, ''Even Internet stocks have to have earnings.''So for much of the three-day convention, anxiety gave way and it was business as usual. Publishers asked  Al Gore and George W. Bush about the cross-ownership rule forbidding newspaper owners from owning television stations in the same markets.Remembering that the San Diego convention was the site of the Tribune Company's early feelers to buy Times Mirror, they closely watched who was having coffee with whom.Back to normal, however, also meant back-to-normal worries, like falling stock prices and readership and competition with direct-mail companies. The worries about the dragons, about terra incognita, however, were gone. The industry has been drawing itself new maps.MEDIA
Anything for a laugh. So say the real authors of the Jewish jokes that Vice President Al Gore used last week, without attribution.Mr. Gore got some big laughs during a speech to the Anti-Defamation League in Washington last week by reciting some titles of imaginary Jewish country-and-western tunes. (Example: ''The Second Time She Said 'Shalom,' I Knew She Meant Goodbye.'')Anything for a laugh. So say the real authors of the Jewish jokes that Vice President Al Gore used last week, without attribution.Mr. Gore got some big laughs during a speech to the Anti-Defamation League in Washington last week by reciting some titles of imaginary Jewish country-and-western tunes. (Example: ''The Second Time She Said 'Shalom,' I Knew She Meant Goodbye.'')He never mentioned the source of the jokes, but after Mr. Gore's routine was reprinted and rebroadcast by several news outlets, a wave of voices washed up on the Internet to give credit to the authors, who turned out not to be from Mr. Gore's speech-writing shop, as one might have supposed, but ordinary folk who contributed to an online humor site (www.topfive.com).Nobody is terribly angry, just a little confounded about what to do. ''The last thing I want to do is start up trouble, because I'm a Gore supporter,'' Chris White, 42, who is the editor of the Web site and lives in Manhattan, said in an interview.''I'm in a quandary, because I honestly believe he's too busy and has more important things to do than to give us credit,'' Mr. White said. ''But at the same time it's annoying because it's copyrighted material, and we work hard to do our stuff.''He said he had not called Mr. Gore's staff to complain. ''It would be nice to get some recognition, but I'm not sure how far I want to pursue it,'' Mr. White said. ''If we get to be too much of a pest, he'll stop using the material.''The vice president's office more or less shrugged off the fact that Mr. Gore had not attributed the jokes. ''Like all of us, the vice president, when he hears a funny joke, tells it to others and passes it on,'' said Melissa Ratcliff, a spokeswoman for his office.''In this case,'' she said, ''the vice president has been repeating these jokes for ages.''Mr. White said the Jewish jokes had been culled from his contributors around the country and posted on his Web site on Feb. 24, 1999. Mr. Gore has apparently used them a couple of times since, but they are by no means part of his regular campaign speeches.One of the titles mentioned by Mr. Gore was dreamed up by John Treusch, 34, a computer systems administrator in Burlington, N.J. He described himself in an interview as a frustrated English major who was happy to have found an outlet for his verbal skills.He said that he had no real complaint about the vice president using his material, but ''I'd rather have Dennis Miller use my stuff than Al Gore.''
Carla Hannan-Welch has always voted for Democrats for president. She has handed out reams of leaflets for Democratic candidates, even pressing her daughter, now 9, into service for the party.But this year, things seem different to the 35-year-old special education teacher from Evergreen Park, a suburb south of Chicago. She is disillusioned with Vice President Al Gore and says she is likely to vote for Gov. George W. Bush of Texas.Carla Hannan-Welch has always voted for Democrats for president. She has handed out reams of leaflets for Democratic candidates, even pressing her daughter, now 9, into service for the party.But this year, things seem different to the 35-year-old special education teacher from Evergreen Park, a suburb south of Chicago. She is disillusioned with Vice President Al Gore and says she is likely to vote for Gov. George W. Bush of Texas.''I don't like the way he carries himself,'' Ms. Hannan-Welch said of Mr. Gore. ''I see him putting his foot in his mouth a lot. My biggest beef is, is someone going to go in there and get things done? With Gore, you don't really know what he believes. It's sort of like, is someone there behind him telling him what to do?''Ms. Hannan-Welch's negative impression of Mr. Gore was echoed to some degree in recent interviews in Chicago with women who said they normally vote Democratic. While most said they also disliked Governor Bush, they were unenthusiastic about the Democratic alternative.''I'm not excited about him,'' said Helen Rabichow, 82, a retired psychologist and Democrat from Chicago's North Side. ''I think it's partly his personality. I think he's kind of a nice jerk. He's a well-meaning, nice guy. But that doesn't necessarily mean that will make him a good president.''Similar reactions have been suggested in recent national polls. They have found that Mr. Bush is preferred by women, particularly married women and mothers. The results have caused enough concern among Gore supporters that last week representatives of groups like the National Organization for Women met with Mr. Gore to urge him to work harder to reach women.In general, the Chicago women interviewed who were sour on Mr. Gore were not reacting to specific issues. Several agreed with his platform, while others said they knew little about his views. Instead, several women said they had a negative gut feeling about him, that he lacked charisma or seemed untrustworthy.By contrast, those women interviewed who supported Mr. Gore generally attributed their approval to his views on issues like abortion, the environment and education, saying that once others understood his positions they would support him, too.Women have been vital for Democrats in recent presidential elections. ''Soccer moms'' in particular helped Bill Clinton win in 1992 and 1996. And Illinois is an important swing state where Chicago usually produces a reliable Democratic majority. A poll this month by the American Research Group found that the candidates were tied in Illinois.''Am I concerned about it? Absolutely,'' said Peter Giangreco, a Gore campaign adviser in Illinois. But, ''if I wasn't concerned about women I'd be freaking out about some other group because that's what we do. All we do is obsess about groups like rural white men over 50 and women with cell phones under 30.''He and other Gore supporters said it was still early in the campaign and most voters were not paying attention. Mr. Giangreco said most still knew little about Mr. Gore, and that he was at his best speaking directly to voters and in debates ''mano a mano.''Mr. Giangreco said that at this point in the 1992 campaign, polls showed women did not like Mr. Clinton, but ''in the end, we had a massive gender gap, very strong women for Bill Clinton.''Gore strategists have been concerned for at least a year about polls showing that women preferred Mr. Bush, and Mr. Gore's campaign appearances have emphasized his longstanding women-friendly agenda.By and large, the women who were interviewed said their views of President Clinton had no bearing on how they saw Mr. Gore. A few said they wished Mr. Clinton were running again. And those disillusioned by the Monica Lewinsky scandal said they did not view Mr. Gore in that context.But Mr. Gore's position as vice president struck some as a liability.''He hasn't come into his own,'' said Barb Meyers, 43, a dental hygienist from a white ethnic enclave in Southwest Chicago. ''He's always kind of been in Clinton's shadow. He doesn't strike me as having a real strong persona.''Several women said they thought Mr. Gore lacked backbone.Jackie Pomarski, 34, a homemaker from a Democratic working-class Southwest Chicago neighborhood, said Mr. Gore ''will say whatever he needs to say to please the crowd. He's kind of a snake in the grass. When he talks I feel like he always has a big smirk on his face.''Some said they felt that Mr. Gore did not have the intellectual muscle or skills to be president, despite his Harvard degree and cerebral reputation, plus the eight years he has had to soak up the details and abilities a president needs.''I don't think that Gore has the right stuff for the presidency,'' said Irene Cohen, a Clinton supporter in her 60's. ''I don't think he has the ability, I don't think he's smart enough, I don't think he presents himself to the public well enough.''Some women's reactions suggested that either Mr. Gore had not communicated his opinions well enough or they did not matter.''Bush just exudes tremendous self-confidence,'' said Ms. Hannan-Welch, an abortion rights supporter. She said some of her relatives would ''roll over in their graves'' if they heard her now. ''He kind of reminds me of a Kennedy. If you look at the Kennedys, they had these issues, they stood up for them. I may not agree with everything he says, but he has a plan and he moves forward.''Mrs. Rabichow, a Bill Bradley supporter, said she did not know Mr. Gore's views on her critical issues, Medicare and prescription drugs. ''I don't know what issues he has,'' she said. ''Clinton was certainly much more outspoken. Clinton's a much brighter guy than Gore.''Some women did mention issues, criticizing, for example, Mr. Gore's break with the Clinton administration when he said Elian Gonzalez and his father should be given permanent residency status.Mrs. Pomarski, who opposes abortion, said that Mr. Gore flip-flopped on the issue. He opposed federal financing of abortion early in his Congressional career, but has supported abortion rights for many years. She said she liked his positions on Northern Ireland and on education.Mr. Gore's supporters said they were confident that he would excite voters once they saw him and Mr. Bush in conventions and debates.''Every time we are at an event with him, women are just overtaken by how funny he is and how smart and how charismatic, and I say I told you so,'' said Kitty Kurth, a Democratic political consultant in Chicago.Christie Hefner, the chairwoman and chief executive of Playboy Enterprises, who is active in Democratic politics, said it was reassuring that women disenchanted with Mr. Gore freely acknowledged they did not know his opinions on issues.''You're in trouble as a candidate if the voters understand you and reject you,'' she said. ''There's a great opportunity here,'' she said. ''You know he's smart enough, you know he's experienced enough.''Nearly all the women interviewed were equally critical of Mr. Bush and said they could not see voting for him. Mrs. Pomarski, for example, called the Texas governor ''sinister.'' And Mrs. Cohen said, ''I don't think either one of them is really capable. If I had to go to the polls right now, I'd vote for Mickey Mouse.''
New York State Republican Party leaders are quietly moving ahead with efforts to identify possible replacement candidates for Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani, hoping that if the mayor drops out of the United States Senate race this week they can quickly rally behind a candidate who would offer Hillary Rodham Clinton a serious challenge.Two members of Congress -- Representatives Rick A. Lazio of Suffolk County and Peter T. King of Nassau County -- are among the likely contenders, party leaders said yesterday. Theodore J. Forstmann, a Wall Street investor and philanthropist, also is on the list. Gov. George E. Pataki is considered the strongest option, but he has said he has no intention of jumping into the race.New York State Republican Party leaders are quietly moving ahead with efforts to identify possible replacement candidates for Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani, hoping that if the mayor drops out of the United States Senate race this week they can quickly rally behind a candidate who would offer Hillary Rodham Clinton a serious challenge.Two members of Congress -- Representatives Rick A. Lazio of Suffolk County and Peter T. King of Nassau County -- are among the likely contenders, party leaders said yesterday. Theodore J. Forstmann, a Wall Street investor and philanthropist, also is on the list. Gov. George E. Pataki is considered the strongest option, but he has said he has no intention of jumping into the race.Republican Party delegates will formally nominate a candidate on May 30 during the party's state convention in Buffalo, but a small group of party leaders, led by Governor Pataki, would most likely anoint a replacement not long after the mayor withdrew.''The governor is the one who will dictate what we are doing here,'' said Stephen J. Miarik, Republican chairman in Monroe County, which includes Rochester. ''If he decides to run, we are 110 percent behind him. Clearly he is the best candidate. If he decided not to run, and supports a particular candidate, we will be behind that candidate unequivocally.''No one has wanted to seem to be too eager, with each of the possible candidates saying that his first preference is for the mayor to stay in the race. But behind the scenes, the search is well under way, with one of the crucial questions being which candidate could move the most quickly to raise the $15 million to $20 million needed to finance the campaign.Given the more than $3.5 million in campaign funds that Mr. Lazio has in the bank  and the traveling he did around the state last year when considering a bid for the Senate, he is probably the best positioned of the contenders to surface so far to take up the challenge if Mr. Pataki does not enter the race, several political analysts and party members said.''Lazio is the obvious one,'' said Stuart Rothenberg, publisher of the Rothenberg Political Report, a newsletter that tracks races for Congress. ''It is hard for me to believe that Lazio won't be the nominee if the mayor drops out.''Mr. Lazio, 42, has not spoken publicly about his efforts, but in recent days he has called county Republican leaders around the state and has spoken with William D. Powers, the state party chairman, Mr. Lazio's spokesman said.Mr. King has been the most aggressive, appearing on a string of national television programs in recent days announcing his intention to run if the mayor bows out.''If he decides to withdraw, I will certainly pursue the nomination,'' Mr. King said yesterday.But Mr. King, 56, who is serving his fourth term in the House, acknowledged that he might have trouble winning the support of state Republican leaders as a result of his decision earlier this year to back the presidential bid of Senator John McCain of Arizona. Party leaders had backed Gov. George W. Bush of Texas.Mr. Forstmann, 59, of New York City, is a political unknown, having never before run for public office. The one most important advantage Mr. Forstmann brings is his wealth, with a spokesman placing his net worth at $925 million. He has indicated that if he runs, he will pay for his campaign with his own money.Mr. Forstmann, who is scheduled to meet tonight with Mr. Powers, has built somewhat of a public profile in the last year with the Children's Scholarship Fund, of which he serves as co-chairman. The group has given out $160 million worth of private school scholarships to 40,000 low-income children nationwide, said Dan Schnur, an adviser to Mr. Forstmann.''Because of his record on education he is a much more formidable candidate for Hillary to run against,'' Mr. Schnur said. ''He steals Hillary's strongest issue, particular among her strongest supporters.''
Two months after Al Gore triumphantly claimed enough delegates for the Democratic presidential nomination, his campaign is struggling to reorient itself toward the general election, and many of the vice president's closest advisers concede that Gov. George W. Bush of Texas has outmaneuvered them in appealing to moderate voters.Several senior Gore advisers interviewed at the campaign headquarters here and elsewhere in the country acknowledged that there was unease on several fronts. They said the campaign had drifted and lost focus since the primaries. They expressed concern that Mr. Bush's move to placate moderates after his sharp turn to the right in the primaries was more swift and successful than they expected.Two months after Al Gore triumphantly claimed enough delegates for the Democratic presidential nomination, his campaign is struggling to reorient itself toward the general election, and many of the vice president's closest advisers concede that Gov. George W. Bush of Texas has outmaneuvered them in appealing to moderate voters.Several senior Gore advisers interviewed at the campaign headquarters here and elsewhere in the country acknowledged that there was unease on several fronts. They said the campaign had drifted and lost focus since the primaries. They expressed concern that Mr. Bush's move to placate moderates after his sharp turn to the right in the primaries was more swift and successful than they expected.Some Gore strategists expressed respect, albeit grudging, for Mr. Bush's stewardship of his organization, one that has been run entirely out of Austin, Tex., by a staff largely untested in national campaigns. And the strategists said they regretted that the Gore campaign for weeks allowed itself to become enveloped in the case of Elian Gonzalez.Campaign officials accepted some responsibility for Mr. Gore's troubles, saying that at times they had failed to dispense appropriate advice and did not adequately fine-tune his message.But mostly, they said, the vice president is suffering because Mr. Bush has moved more aggressively to lay out his agenda, and the public has not had a chance to compare his positions with Mr. Gore's.Tony Coelho, the Gore campaign chairman, said in an interview here that while Mr. Gore had distanced himself months earlier from the Clinton administration on the Gonzalez matter, the campaign should have more effectively conveyed that when Mr. Gore spoke out in March, saying the Cuban boy should be granted permanent residency status.''It was probably one of our biggest mistakes,'' Mr. Coelho said. ''When we articulated what we did in March, the media didn't know the evolution of his position through four or five months. So the media took it to be something very dramatic when it wasn't. And that was our mistake, not to have put it in perspective.''Still, even the most negative Gore advisers insisted that they were not alarmed, and that with Election Day nearly six months away, there was time for the campaign to right itself. But their biggest fear, they said, was that if Mr. Gore does not move quickly to refine his message, impressions may be locked in place.The campaign's difficulties have been magnified by several recent opinion polls that show Mr. Gore trailing Mr. Bush in virtually every demographic category. Many surveys have found that Mr. Bush is leading Mr. Gore among almost every age and income group nationally except for elderly voters; Mr. Bush has had more success drawing independents and, strikingly, he is even outperforming Mr. Gore among married women, traditionally a more Democratic constituency. In several important states that are usually reliably Democratic -- like Iowa, Minnesota, Oregon, Washington and Wisconsin -- surveys show that the vice president faces unusually tight competition.Privately, some Gore advisers said they worried that Republicans had rallied around Mr. Bush far more eagerly than Democrats around Mr. Gore because they were so determined to retake the White House.But publicly, many Gore aides insisted it was too early to fret.''You know what I keep telling my friends who are panicking over polls?'' asked Donna Brazile, the Gore campaign manager. ''That it's a summertime passion in Washington, D.C.'' Seeking to reassure Democrats, she added: ''The Republican Party cannot win from the right so they are trying to dance and shuffle to the middle. Well, the middle is ours. It's occupied.''Carter Eskew, a top Gore strategist, said of Mr. Bush: ''The race has settled somewhat in his favor, but it is still a very close race. In terms of what Bush is doing, there's some good camouflage going on. It reflects a wearing off of some of the damage done to Bush in the primaries. But eventually voters will see through it.''Acknowledging the faltering poll numbers, Mr. Coelho said: ''I am cognizant of the fact that with women we need to be better by the time November comes. The thing is that most of these women don't understand where George Bush is on a lot of these issues. The pollsters say the public is a lot more interested in vacations right now.'' But, he added, ''We have a challenge between here and November.''One top Gore aide was not as upbeat. ''We went into a lull after the primaries and the Bush campaign went right on script,'' the aide said. ''Gore obviously has to step up his game and differentiate himself. We have to sharpen our focus. We have not focused on the winning formula.''Another senior campaign official put it this way: ''The big concern is if the impression in the media becomes that the campaign is adrift -- and that it gets to voters eventually.''The belief that Mr. Gore needs to jump-start his operation has sparked internal debate over whether his strategy of ridiculing Mr. Bush's proposals, while successful in the primaries against former Senator Bill Bradley, threaten to make the vice president appear too harsh. Mr. Coelho, for his part, insisted that Mr. Gore would not shrink from his aggressive tone. ''The public wants somebody who will fight,'' he said.As part of the drive to sharpen Mr. Gore's presentation and to consolidate a campaign with separate (and at times overlapping) orbits here, at the White House and on the plane with Mr. Gore, the campaign's top advisers and consultants met here Friday for the first of what will be a series of weekly meetings. Participants said they hashed over approaches to refine Mr. Gore's message, as well as tactical considerations, like which states to compete in most heavily.Now that the campaign is not strapped for money, as it was in the primaries, Mr. Coelho said he was retooling the organization for such a major infusion of aides that it will soon move to larger headquarters in Nashville. Among the new hires is Mark D. Fabiani, who, as a deputy campaign manager for communications, has been dispatched to help improve sometimes strained relations between the campaign and the press. Mr. Fabiani is a former White House special counsel who helped contain the damage from the Whitewater inquiry.''The candidate has done a tremendous job,'' Mr. Coelho said. ''The campaign still struggles to get up to the candidate. I think the execution at times could be better on our part. And we've made some mistakes. But I feel very good about where we are compared to six months ago.''Mr. Coelho said, repeatedly, that the press should not dwell on the vice president's recent dips in the polls, but on how he is still in far better shape than six months ago, when Mr. Bush was clobbering him by wide margins. Arguing that Mr. Gore was suffering in part because of expectations, he said: ''We came out of our primary higher than we should have. He came out of his primary lower than he should have.''Members of the Gore high command were quick to note that Bill Clinton was way down in the polls at this point in 1992 -- and won the election. And at this point in 1988, Michael S. Dukakis basked in a comfortable lead, only to lose.''We've seen this movie before,'' Mr. Eskew said, ''and it has a happy ending.''Already, the 2000 campaign has been remarkable for the many reversals of fortune. A year ago, Mr. Gore did not even view Mr. Bradley as a threat. By the fall, Mr. Bradley's success forced Mr. Gore to retool his campaign. And by the end of the primaries, Mr. Gore appeared to be more potent than Mr. Bush, who was severely wounded after a contentious scrimmage with Senator John McCain in which he made stark appeals to the right that many Democrats said would haunt him.Karl Rove, Mr. Bush's chief strategist, said his campaign was moving forward with a general election strategy that had long been in place but was interrupted by the primaries. He said the Gore campaign's drive to undermine Mr. Bush's experience would fail because voters ''recognize that Bush has crossed the threshold of experience.''''We've had seven good weeks,'' Mr. Rove said. ''With the lights turned back on and the arena flooded with sunlight, Bush has essentially returned to where he was in December and Gore has returned to where he was.''Offering a counteranalogy, Ms. Brazile said: ''We're in a big theater and there's no audience. There's not enough people paying attention.''Geoffrey Garin, a Democratic pollster, said: ''Bush's charm offensive has been quite effective and the challenge for Gore is to get the race re-engaged as quickly as he can. We're in the best period for Bush. He's not forced to operate under pressure or in the heat of the battle. In those circumstances he delivers a plausible and often appealing performance. Gore is at his best in the heat of battle.''Another Democratic pollster, Mark Mellman, said: ''There is angst and anguish because you never like to be in a position where you slip. But there's a lot of historic evidence that suggests that what's happening right now doesn't matter very much.''Compounding the unease here are complaints by some in the campaign that Mr. Coelho has had a turbulent relationship with Ms. Brazile over disagreement about her taking a top post at the Democratic National Committee. Scoffing at such suggestions, Mr. Coelho said: ''She's strong willed and that's what you need in a manager. Donna's going to be a very valuable star when this is over with.''Mr. Coelho also cited -- and immediately discounted -- concerns among some Democrats that he and Ed Rendell, the general chairman of the Democratic National Committee, had been feuding over spending priorities. ''If it wasn't for us, Rendell wouldn't be there,'' Mr. Coelho said. ''Rendell was our creature.''The naysayers, Mr. Coelho said, are ignorant of how the campaign is repositioning itself. ''When people say, 'Maybe you've lost some traction,' they have no idea what we're doing,'' he said. ''We're doing what we're supposed to be doing. Just watch us. Watch us as we go forward.''
''When sorrows come, they come not single spies, but in battalions.''For Rudy Giuliani, Shakespeare's prediction came true with the news of his prostate cancer; that, in a way, triggered the exposure of a current extramarital relationship. That was followed by his public announcement of separation plans, which was news to his actress-wife, who then lashed back with a charge of a previous relationship with his former press agent.''When sorrows come, they come not single spies, but in battalions.''For Rudy Giuliani, Shakespeare's prediction came true with the news of his prostate cancer; that, in a way, triggered the exposure of a current extramarital relationship. That was followed by his public announcement of separation plans, which was news to his actress-wife, who then lashed back with a charge of a previous relationship with his former press agent.Because of the cancer's danger to his life, partisan glee at the latest revelations is muted. But it will grow as those who stuck with the Clintons say: ''See? Everybody does it. Now let's hear you Bible-thumping moralizers excoriate the Republican mayor the way you dumped on the Democratic president.''Take it from a Nixon hand: the ''everybody did it'' excuse didn't fly a generation ago on power abuse and won't fly now on this. In Giuliani's travails is no score-settling for Clinton's trials.That's because political anger at Clinton was directed at his serial obstructions, harassments and lies, which amounted to wrongdoing on a grand scale -- and not at his fidelity shortfalls, an ever-more-common failing in which he is joined by the majority of American adults. Nobody has yet accused Giuliani of harassing a female co-worker or lying under oath.But what of the saying, ''People who live in glass houses shouldn't throw stones''? Liberal friends demand: How can you conservative stiffs rail about family values when some of your own leaders, piously proclaiming their moral superiority, are fooling around like modern Elmer Gantrys?Not all moralists are immoral, not all libertarians are libertines and not all right-wingers are stiffs. The entrapment and destruction of Democratic presidential candidate Gary Hart was repeatedly denounced in this space; so was the unconscionable rummaging through Bob Packwood's personal diaries by a nosy Nevada senator who, as retirement nears, has now discovered the need for privacy.In that regard, many of us -- even some scandalmongers -- draw a line between private life and public conduct. I'm for full disclosure of financial dealings past and present, but what candidates do in their bedrooms is none of our business, and I really don't care if Al Gore or George W. Bush smoked pot or worse in their youth. Both Giuliani and his former flack deny his wife's charge of an affair; in the absence of evidence, we should presume innocence.Ideological opportunists will ask: Doesn't the acrimonious collapse of the Mayor's marriage cast a shadow over his protests at religious defamation by the sensation-seeking Brooklyn museum, his knee-jerk defense of police accused of brutality and his denial of a livelihood to menacing squeegee men?It should not, but those politically afflicted are conflicted. Now Republicans know how ardent feminists felt when they saw their sister, Kathleen Willey, accuse Clinton of harassment on ''60 Minutes.'' Surely Rudy, through hubris or humanity, let down the traditionalist side.But life happens. People fall in and out of love, or in love with more than one; vows broken can often be re-set and recriminations withdrawn, or separated parents find ways to make peace for the sake of children. The voters, as often as not, forgive (though liberals are more likely to forgive liberals than conservatives are to forgive conservatives).Mayor Giuliani is not under sentence of death from God, nor political pariah-hood from the voters of New York. Prostate cancer, discovered early, is treatable; most males so diagnosed die in old age with it rather than from it. He and we can assume he will live to run again another day.But not this day and not for this office. He should stop bewailing his outcast fate and get out of the way of defeating Hillary. That torch should be picked up by Gov. George Pataki; if he lacks the guts, Representatives Peter King and Rick Lazio stand ready.To be of help to one of them, Giuliani should withdraw today, not next week, and declare his expectation to take his treatment and soon serve healthily as mayor. No hair shirt or pained public introspection necessary. Let Rudy return to being Rudy, with the sharp corners knocked off by life's blows, and set his sights on the governor's mansion two years from now.
With a rallying cry of ''enough is enough,'' hundreds of thousands of mothers and other gun control advocates marched on the nation's capital and in several cities around the country today, demanding ''sensible gun laws,'' mourning the loss of children to gun violence and vowing to transform the politics of gun control.Under a clear spring sky, the Million Mom March crowded the grassy expanse of the National Mall, cheering one speaker after another who assailed the National Rifle Association and its power over Congress. Many of the demonstrators wept at the stories of mothers who had lost their children, listening transfixed to the families shattered by shootings from Columbine High School, in Littleton, Colo., where 15 died last year, to the Michigan elementary school where a 6-year-old girl was killed by a classmate on Feb. 29.With a rallying cry of ''enough is enough,'' hundreds of thousands of mothers and other gun control advocates marched on the nation's capital and in several cities around the country today, demanding ''sensible gun laws,'' mourning the loss of children to gun violence and vowing to transform the politics of gun control.Under a clear spring sky, the Million Mom March crowded the grassy expanse of the National Mall, cheering one speaker after another who assailed the National Rifle Association and its power over Congress. Many of the demonstrators wept at the stories of mothers who had lost their children, listening transfixed to the families shattered by shootings from Columbine High School, in Littleton, Colo., where 15 died last year, to the Michigan elementary school where a 6-year-old girl was killed by a classmate on Feb. 29.''I come to you today, two days after what would have been her seventh birthday,'' said Veronica McQueen, the Michigan girl's mother. ''I am a mom with a terrible tragedy, and I hope it never, ever happens again.''It was a Mother's Day of high emotion and powerful imagery, both here and in more than 60 other demonstrations scheduled around the country this weekend. Many in the crowd on the Mall today wore T-shirts with the photographs of family members killed by guns. Judi Ellis of Toledo, Ohio, carried a placard that declared, ''I march today to save a child tomorrow,'' with a picture of her son, who was killed in 1995, just before he left for college. ''You're not supposed to bury your son,'' she said.Much of the crowd seemed to be the quintessential suburban mothers who are so intensely pursued in politics today, not touched by the issue of gun violence themselves but outraged at its toll and fearful of its spread. They came in sensible shoes and straw hats, with extra water and strollers for their children, and when the children's performer Raffi took the stage, they happily sang along with ''This Little Light of Mine.''Longtime advocates for gun control urged them to make themselves felt on Election Day. ''You are the future now,'' said Sarah Brady of Handgun Control Inc., who became an activist on gun control after her husband, James S. Brady, a former White House press secretary, was seriously injured in the assassination attempt on President Ronald Reagan. ''We must either change the minds of lawmakers on these issues or, for God's sake, this November let's change the lawmakers.''President Clinton, greeting some of the marchers at the White House this morning, also urged them to keep fighting. ''Don't be deterred by the intimidation, don't be deterred by the screaming, don't be deterred by the political mountain you have to climb,'' he said. ''You just remember this: there are more people who think like you in America.''Hillary Rodham Clinton, a candidate for the Senate in New York,  joined the march. Earlier, at the White House, she struck a theme that was heard again and again from the speakers: ''I think it sometimes takes women to stand up and say, enough is enough. Enough is enough.  We have had enough bloodshed, enough violence. When children are afraid to walk down their own blocks, or walk into their own schools, or when parents are afraid to let children even visit neighbors, it is time to say, enough.''Rosie O'Donnell, the mistress of ceremonies today, who touted the rally on her TV talk show and was greeted like a rock star, voiced the organizers' hopes when she declared, ''The rally is over, the movement has just begun.''The Million Mom March was the brainchild of Donna Dees-Thomases, a part-time publicist for CBS, the sister-in-law of Susan Thomases, a close friend of Mrs. Clinton, and a New Jersey mother who said her maternal instincts kicked in after the shooting last August at a Jewish community center in Los Angeles. The march supported an array of gun legislation, notably registration for all handguns and licensing of all handgun owners.The National Rifle Association and its allies denounced the march's agenda today, asserting that ''registration and licensing schemes'' were in fact ''a controlled burn of the Second Amendment, and setting fire to freedom should never be the answer,'' in the words of Wayne LaPierre, executive vice president of the group. Speaking on the NBC program ''Meet the Press,'' Mr. LaPierre said the Million Mom March agenda was ''out of step with moms, and I think it's out of step with the American public,'' and suggested that its organizers were allied with the Democrats. The criticism was dismissed by Ms. Dees-Thomases.Whatever its lasting impact, the Million Mom March clearly pushed the gun issue onto the national agenda in recent days. And it highlighted what the latest New York Times/ CBS News Poll found about women:  that they tend to be stronger supporters of new restrictions on guns.Seventy-eight percent of the women in the new poll said laws covering the sale of handguns should be made stricter, compared with 62 percent of the men. The poll has an overall margin of sampling error of plus or minus three percentage points.Still, there was a small demonstration in Washington today sponsored by women who oppose new gun laws, a group known as Second Amendment Sisters. ''This is our response to the Million Mom March,'' said Juli Bednarzyk, a co-founder of the group. ''They said they were speaking for all women and we thought, 'Well, they don't speak for us. There are women who feel differently.' ''An N.R.A. member and gun owner, Ms. Bednarzyk said she had no ill will toward the people on the other end of the Mall. ''We have the same goal as those women -- safe children,'' she said, adding that they just had different ways of getting to that goal. On the stage, speakers denounced ''liberal judges,'' ''predator criminals'' and ''the million misinformed moms.''Organizers of the Million Mom March said their crowd numbered 750,000 in Washington; the number could not be independently confirmed as the federal Park Police no longer gives crowd estimates after years of controversy over how many people attend events like these. It appeared to be one of the largest gatherings on the Mall in recent years, and it clearly was a showing that gladdened the hearts of longtime gun control organizers.According to The Associated Press, the Washington area subway system had carried 252,246 riders by 5 p.m. On a typical Sunday, it carries about 170,000 riders.Around the country, in cities from Birmingham, Ala., to Los Angeles, thousands attended other mothers' rallies. In Denver, the police estimated the crowd at 3,000. The main speaker was Tom Mauser, whose son was killed at Columbine High School.''You may have heard that Colorado is ground zero in the gun debate,'' Mr. Mauser declared. ''You bet it is.  And we're going to show the rest of the nation how you respond to it.''In Los Angeles, politicians read the names of children killed by guns in Los Angeles County in 1999. Ann Rice Lane, chairwoman of Women against Gun Violence, which was the program's host, said: ''Today is an event. Tomorrow the work begins.''And in Chicago, amid protests from counterdemonstrators shouting ''Ban the gangs, not the guns,'' women gathered at Grant Park.  Obrellia Smith, 50, said, ''I hope we will send a message to the legislators that they have to do something about this gun epidemic or they will lose their seats. We're losing too many babies.''Democrats clearly hoped that the rallies would mark a sea change in the politics of gun control and an end to the truism that the gun lobby can turn out its vote, while the forces of gun control cannot. Celinda Lake, a Democratic pollster who attended today's march in Washington, said, in a reference to Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, the presumptive Republican presidential nominee: ''Bush ought to be terrified. Look out there -- that is the face of the soccer mom.''But polls have shown that women are almost evenly divided in their views of how the two presidential candidates handle the gun issue. The latest New York Times/CBS News Poll asked, ''Regardless of which candidate you prefer for president, who do you agree with more on the issue of gun control -- Al Gore or George W. Bush?'' Thirty-five percent of the women said they agreed more with Mr. Gore, while 30 percent said they agreed more with Mr. Bush. Among mothers, 33 percent said they agree more with Mr. Bush, 24 percent with Mr. Gore.That bipartisan note was struck today by one of the speakers, Dr. Antonia C. Novello, the New York State health commissioner, who declared, ''Protecting the rights of children is not Democrat or Republican, it is simply the right thing to do.''In the end, for all the political maneuvering, there was a nonpartisan tone to much of the day. Many of the women came to the march through their churches or synagogues, or heard about the march on television or on the Internet. The organizers said there were five million hits on the Million Mom March Web site in the last six days.At a ''Tapestry'' display in the middle of the Mall, where marchers could post messages, most were anything but political:''In memory of Steve Smith. We won't forget.''''For Mrs. Willis's son. Killed over a pen.''''Christopher, We love you and miss you. Mommy is here and Daddy and Justin, in your memory.''''Enough is enough.''Around that display, and throughout much of the rally, the mood was one of simple grief. ''We're hurting,'' said Vicky Lindsey, a founder of Justice for Murdered Children, whose 19-year-old son was killed five years ago. ''We are truly hurting.''
INTERNATIONALA3-11New Questions Raised On Gulf War Attack  New questions have emerged about the conduct of one of the top American commanders in the Persian Gulf war who came under investigation in 1991 after a member of his unit complained that his troops had pummeled retreating Iraqi forces in an unprovoked attack.A6Palestinians Protest in Israel  Thousands of Palestinians in the West Bank and Gaza poured into the streets for angry protests, some of which were marked by violent confrontations with Israeli troops. The protesters called for Israel to release Palestinian prisoners. In a prison in northern Israel, the prisoners themselves rioted.A3INTERNATIONALA3-11New Questions Raised On Gulf War Attack  New questions have emerged about the conduct of one of the top American commanders in the Persian Gulf war who came under investigation in 1991 after a member of his unit complained that his troops had pummeled retreating Iraqi forces in an unprovoked attack.A6Palestinians Protest in Israel  Thousands of Palestinians in the West Bank and Gaza poured into the streets for angry protests, some of which were marked by violent confrontations with Israeli troops. The protesters called for Israel to release Palestinian prisoners. In a prison in northern Israel, the prisoners themselves rioted.A3Concerns Over Peru's Election  International observers say they have serious concerns that President Alberto K. Fujimori may be preparing to steal enough votes to ensure he wins a third term. The concerns are so grave that Mr. Fujimori's challenger is threatening to pull out of the race rather than lend credibility to a process he sees as flawed.A8Important Vote in Germany  The governing Social Democrats won a comfortable victory in Germany's largest state, North Rhine-Westphalia, confirming both the resurgence of Chancellor Gerhard Schroder and the plight of the opposition Christian Democrats.A6European Federation Proposed  Joschka Fischer, the German foreign minister, has proposed the creation of a European federation in which power would shift from national governments to a central European administration.A6Some U.N. Troops Are Freed  Eighteen of the United Nations peacekeepers held hostage by rebel forces in Sierra Leone since the beginning of the month were released over the weekend after negotiations between Indian peacekeepers and local rebels.A10More Ethiopia-Eritrea Fighting  Ethiopia said that it had captured more ground in a third day of clashes with its neighbor, Eritrea, but Eritrean officials said the report was just propaganda aimed at voters in Ethiopia's nationwide elections.A10Search for Bodies in Kosovo  Teams from the international war crimes tribunal in the Hague have resumed their search in Kosovo for bodies and other clues that would back the indictment of the Yugoslav president and four of his top allies on war crimes charges.A4Belgrade Presses Opponents  The Yugoslav government announced a crackdown on the country's main opposition groups, accusing them of masterminding, on behalf of NATO, the slaying of Bosko Perosevic, a top official in the governing Socialist Party. The groups have denied the accusations.A4NATIONALA12-17Hundreds of Thousands March for Gun Control  Mothers and other gun control advocates marched on the nation's capital and in several cities around the country, demanding ''sensible gun laws'' and vowing to transform the politics of gun control.A1Gore Camp Seeks Focus  Vice President Al Gore's campaign is struggling to reorient itself toward the general election and many of Mr. Gore's closest advisers concede that Gov. George W. Bush of Texas has outmaneuvered them in appealing to moderate voters.A1Some women in Chicago who said they normally voted Democratic expressed dissatisfaction with Mr. Gore, echoing reactions that have been suggested on a larger scale in recent national polls.A17Elderly Fight for Coverage  In the struggle over how to strengthen Medicare, elderly people seeking prescription drug benefits have found themselves competing against hospitals and other health care providers that want Congress to increase payments to them.A1More Oversight in Los Angeles  The Justice Department's announcement last week that it was prepared to file a civil rights lawsuit against the Los Angeles Police Department was only the latest in a series of federal actions and oversight efforts that have made greater Los Angeles a virtual ward of Washington.A12Los Alamos Fire Spreads  The fire at Los Alamos, N.M., that has destroyed more than 42,000 acres continued to expand. But the area's emotional recovery began as the New Mexico National Guard organized bus tours for residents whose homes had been destroyed.A12Gore Jokes Aren't Gore's  The Jewish jokes that Vice President Al Gore used last week turn out to have come from a Web site, which was not credited as the source.A16SCIENCE/HEALTHAssigning Worth to Genes  Genetic testing is becoming more common, and, for almost every gene, some medical institution or some company owns a patent on its use. But patients whose cells provided the genes that have been patented are almost never compensated. Now, some patients have become wary about providing their tissue for genetic research. A few have demanded money up front before providing tissue. Others are writing contracts spelling out what they are entitled to if they help scientists find genes.A1NEW YORK/REGIONB1-6Conflicting Advice As Giuliani Weighs Choices  Mayor Giuliani found himself confronting an array of conflicting advice from a divided group of advisers, as he neared a final decision about the future of his campaign for the United States Senate. Some of the advisers have financial, political and career interests riding on whether Mr. Giuliani pursues his campaign against Hillary Rodham Clinton.A1New York State Republican Party leaders are quietly moving ahead with efforts to identify possible replacement candidates for Mayor Giuliani.B5Pataki Ads Criticized  Governor Pataki has starred in no fewer than five television advertising campaigns paid for by state agencies under his control. The advertisements have led government reform groups and Democrats to charge that they are nothing more than a veiled political campaign at government expense.B1Suit Against Con Edison  Westchester County plans to file a lawsuit today seeking to stop Consolidated Edison from increasing electric bills to cover costs from a radioactive leak at a nuclear plant in February, the county executive said.B2Cabby Stabbed to Death  A yellow-cab driver died in Manhattan after another driver stabbed him twice in the chest during an argument over a parking space, the police said. The stabbing was one of six killings in the city in 24 hours.B3ARTSE1-10SPORTSMONDAYD1-12Knicks Defeat the Heat  The Knicks defeated the Heat, 91-83, evening their Eastern Conference semifinal series at two games apiece.D1OBITUARIESB8Keizo Obuchi  A bland, self-effacing politician who as Japan's prime minister brought some stability to the country's faltering economy and fractious politics, he was 62.B8Margaret Harris  A theatrical designer whose name was synonymous for more than half a century with superlative yet economical stage sets and costumes in London, Stratford-Upon-Avon and on Broadway, she was 95.B8BUSINESS DAYC1-24Fed to Meet on Interest Rates  The Federal Reserve Board meets tomorrow to consider whether to raise interest rates and, amid signs of inflation, may feel compelled to adopt a more aggressive inflation-fighting stance than it has employed in years. Analysts and investors expect the central bank to raise its benchmark interest rate by a half-percentage point at the meeting.A15Deal for 'Friends' Stars  The stars of the NBC comedy ''Friends'' agreed to a deal that would bring the show back for two more seasons, and would pay them each $750,000 an episode as well as a higher percentage of future profits from the show's sales in syndication. The six stars had demanded more than $1 million an episode.C8A.I.G. Board Challenged  Several shareholder proposals challenging the dominance of the chief executive of the American International Group will be presented at the annual meeting on Wednesday. Experts say the demands highlight the gap between A.I.G.'s management structure and prevailing practices at most American corporations.C1Intel Plans Spinoff  Intel plans to announce today that it will spin off a tiny Internet company, Developonline.com, that it hopes will help consumers and business custom-order technology products.C10Berkshire Earnings Rise  In its quarterly report, released on the Internet on Saturday, Berkshire Hathaway posted net income of $807 million, or $531 a Class A share, compared with $541 million, or $356 a share, in the period a year earlier. Revenue increased 18.8 percent, to $6.47 billion from $5.44 billion.C6Metal Companies to Go Online  Fourteen of the world's largest mining and metals companies said that they were creating a single procurement marketplace on the Internet, which could cut the industry's $200 billion-a-year supply bill.C6Business DigestC1EDITORIALA18-19Editorials: The power of mothers marching; cheaper drugs to combat AIDS; stolen art and the law; Ford's environmental candor.Columns: William Safire, Bob Herbert.BridgeE4Public LivesA12CrosswordE8TV ListingsE9Metro DiaryB2WeatherB7
One of the top American commanders in the  Persian Gulf war came under inves tigation in 1991 after a member of his  unit complained that his troops had  pummeled retreating Iraqi forces in  an unprovoked attack two days after  a cease-fire went into effect.Military investigators, who fielded  the anonymous complaint and com pleted a secret report in 1991, exoner ated Barry R. McCaffrey, now a re tired four-star Army general and  President Clinton's top drug control  official. But questions about the at tack have been revived by a report  appearing in The New Yorker maga zine on Monday that quotes senior  Army officers, including one of the  top officers on General McCaffrey's  staff, as saying the attack was unjus tified.One of the top American commanders in the  Persian Gulf war came under inves tigation in 1991 after a member of his  unit complained that his troops had  pummeled retreating Iraqi forces in  an unprovoked attack two days after  a cease-fire went into effect.Military investigators, who fielded  the anonymous complaint and com pleted a secret report in 1991, exoner ated Barry R. McCaffrey, now a re tired four-star Army general and  President Clinton's top drug control  official. But questions about the at tack have been revived by a report  appearing in The New Yorker maga zine on Monday that quotes senior  Army officers, including one of the  top officers on General McCaffrey's  staff, as saying the attack was unjus tified.Patrick Lamar, the operations of ficer of General McCaffrey's divi sion, told the magazine that the at tack was a ''giant hoax'' in which  overwhelming firepower was used  against an Iraqi armored force that  put up little resistance.The article by Seymour M. Hersh  pits a tenacious investigative report er against one of the nation's most  aggressive military men.Mr. Hersh first made his name by  reporting on the massacre of Viet namese civilians by Americans in  the hamlet of My Lai. His 25,000- word article on General McCaffrey  is the longest The New Yorker has  published since 1993.In addition to challenging General  McCaffrey's conduct, Mr. Hersh also  asserts that some of the command er's troops fired on Iraqi prisoners.  And he questions the integrity of the  military's investigations of this and  other allegations of gulf war miscon duct, charging that critics were often  either ignored or intimidated.But General McCaffrey insists  that he has been the victim of a  journalistic attack. He says Mr.  Hersh pursued him for months and  tried unsuccessfully to prove that he  had committed felonies during his  service in Vietnam and had stolen a  bicycle as a child.And in recent weeks, General  McCaffrey has mounted a pre-emp tive campaign to make Mr. Hersh  the issue, distributing letters to re porters by military officers com plaining of Mr. Hersh's tactics, and  directing journalists to the Army's  in-house investigation, which con cluded that the attack was provoked  by the Iraqis and was within the  cease-fire rules of engagement.''I have been dealing with the  press for years, but nothing prepared  me for this,'' General McCaffrey  said in an interview.General McCaffrey has long had a  reputation as an ambitious com mander. He was badly wounded in  Vietnam, but that did not shake his  confidence or ardor for battle.As allied troops prepared to battle  the Iraqis, General McCaffrey was in  command of the Army's 24th Infan try Division, which had been com manded by H. Norman Schwarzkopf,  the former gulf war commander, and  which consisted of 26,000 soldiers and  8,600 vehicles.The task of General McCaffrey's  division was to take the fight to  Iraq's Republican Guard. Unlike  some of his fellow Army command ers, who methodically and cautiously  maneuvered their units on the battle field, General McCaffrey had his sol diers race through southern Iraq,  and they were on the verge of cutting  off many of the Iraqi forces when  President Bush announced that a  cease-fire would take place after 100  hours of ground combat.Mr. Hersh's article makes several  allegations. One of the most sensa tional is that on Feb. 27, 1991, a unit of  armored vehicles within General  McCaffrey's division fired high- powered machine guns into a group  of more than 350 disarmed Iraqi  prisoners. General McCaffrey was  not personally implicated in the epi sode, although Mr. Hersh suggests  the general set a tone that encour aged use of excessive firepower.Mr. Hersh cites a tape of radio  conversations during the episode  that shows soldiers were horrified by  what is portrayed as a panicky blun der by trigger-happy troops.According to Mr. Hersh, the Amer ican captors piled the prisoners' con fiscated weapons into a truck, drove  it into the desert, and blew it up. The  spectacular explosion apparently ex cited the drivers of nearby American  fighting vehicles, who rolled to the  scene and began blazing away with  their machine guns.''Why are we shooting at these  people, when they are not shooting  us?'' one soldier asked on the tape  cited by The New Yorker. ''It's mur der,'' someone else said on the tape.General McCaffrey said that the  soldier who made the tape was leav ing the scene in a Humvee at the  time and did not actually see what  the armored vehicles were firing at.  He said a subsequent Army investi gation determined that not a single  Iraqi prisoner was killed or injured.General McCaffrey's decisions im mediately after the 1991 Persian  Gulf war have long been the subject  of debate. After a cease-fire was  announced, an Iraqi unit trying to  retreat stumbled into General  McCaffrey's division, and there was  an exchange of fire.Hundreds of armored vehicles and  trucks were destroyed in the fight,  and General McCaffrey told Cable  News Network soon after the battle  that he believed 400 Iraqis has been  killed.Some Army officers complained  after the war that General McCaf frey had used the episode as an ex cuse to pummel the Iraqis in one of  the most one-sided fights of the war.  The chief operations officer of the  Army's VII Corps, for example, de clared that rules of engagement fol lowed by his forces would have pre cluded such an attack.The dispute has been explored in  several books, and was the subject of  a 1991 investigation by the Army's  Criminal Investigation Command.  The investigation cleared the gen eral, and he has cited it this past  week in his defense. Mr. Hersh's  account, however, suggests for the  first time that the discomfort over  the attack on March 2, 1991, also ran  deep within General McCaffrey's  own 24th Infantry Division, citing  comments by his operations officer.Mr. Hersh's interpretation of the  fight is sharply contested by General  McCaffrey. Mr. Hersh suggests that  General McCaffrey deliberately pro voked the fighting by deploying his  troops in front of a causeway over  Lake Hammar and, thus, along a  likely Iraqi retreat route.He also quotes officers as saying  that many of the Iraqi tanks were  being carried by trucks and that  their turrets were turned to the rear;that the initial shots from the Iraqi  side were not a real attack but a sign  of panic upon encountering the  Americans blocking their retreat;and that McCaffrey ordered addi tional waves of assault long after any  sign of resistance from the Iraqis.''There was no need to be shooting  at anybody,'' Lt. Gen. James H. John son Jr., who commanded the 82nd  Airborne, is quoted as saying. ''They  couldn't surrender fast enough. The  war was over.''General McCaffrey, however, in sisted that Mr. Hersh's account was  skewed. He said he moved his troops  up to a boundary decided by higher- level Army officers, who were over seeing the war from Saudi Arabia.And General McCaffrey added  that he had no reason to think his  units were astride an escape route  because he believed that the cause way had been destroyed by Ameri can warplanes. He also denied that  most of the Iraqi tanks had their  guns turned to the rear and insisted  that he carried out the attack to  protect his men.''This whole notion that the tanks  were up on trucks and that their guns  were all to the rear is bull,'' he said.  ''This was an armed unit moving  through the desert.''Gen. Gary Luck, retired, the com mander of the XVIII Airborne Corps  during the gulf war and General  McCaffrey's superior, said he went  to the battle scene immediately after  the fight and concluded that General  McCaffrey had acted appropriately.  ''I think it was a fair fight,'' he said.General McCaffrey has also re leased a letter by General Schwarz kopf to Mr. Hersh in which the allied  commander said he was not aware of  any impropriety in the attack.General McCaffrey has cited the  Army investigation in his defense.  The investigation has received scant  public attention until now. Leon Pa netta, a senior White House official  at the time of the general's appoint ment as President Clinton's top anti- drug man in 1996, told The New  Yorker that the Clinton administra tion was unaware of the investigation  back then.But Robert S. Weiner, spokesman  for General McCaffrey, says that the  existence of the investigation was not  a secret, and that it was known to the  Senate committee which confirmed  the general's appointment.The report into actions by General  McCaffrey's division in the gulf war  was 2,100 pages long, and based on  interviews with some 200 witnesses.The allegations about the March 2  attack did not apparently cloud Gen eral McCaffrey's career. After the  gulf war, he was promoted several  times, and served as the four-star  commander of American forces in  Latin America.For all the criticism in the New  Yorker account, General McCaffrey  said he was relieved that Mr. Hersh  had dropped many of his earlier alle gations. He said that as a result of  the episode he has gathered an array  of material on the Persian Gulf war,  and is planning to write his own book.Correction:  May 16, 2000, Tuesday  Because of a production error, Page A6 was omitted from some copies yesterday and replaced by a duplicate of Page A11. The missing page carried an article about a report in The New Yorker magazine describing a 1991 investigation of Gen. Barry R. McCaffrey over an attack on retreating Iraqi forces after a cease-fire in the Gulf war. The omitted article may be found at  www.nytimes.com. Or readers may request it from Production Quality Control, The New York Times, 229 West 43rd Street, New York, N.Y. 10036-3959; telephone (212) 556-1992. E-mail: quality@nytimes.com. (Include a postal address.)Correction: May 16, 2000, TuesdayBecause of a production error, Page A6 was omitted from some copies yesterday and replaced by a duplicate of Page A11. The missing page carried an article about a report in The New Yorker magazine describing a 1991 investigation of Gen. Barry R. McCaffrey over an attack on retreating Iraqi forces after a cease-fire in the Gulf war. The omitted article may be found at  www.nytimes.com. Or readers may request it from Production Quality Control, The New York Times, 229 West 43rd Street, New York, N.Y. 10036-3959; telephone (212) 556-1992. E-mail: quality@nytimes.com. (Include a postal address.)<br><br>
On the verge of reaching a final decision about his campaign for the Senate, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani found himself confronting an array of conflicting advice yesterday from his advisers, some of whom have financial, political and career interests riding on whether he stays in the race.Mr. Giuliani is expected to announce his plans as soon as today, in the face of pressure from Republicans concerned that his decision to cancel campaign events signaled his exit from the contest against Hillary Rodham Clinton. Yet as Mr. Giuliani struggles to unravel the tangled medical, political and personal considerations, he is turning to City Hall aides, campaign advisers and personal friends whose agendas are not necessarily topped by concerns about his health, personal problems and future political viability.On the verge of reaching a final decision about his campaign for the Senate, Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani found himself confronting an array of conflicting advice yesterday from his advisers, some of whom have financial, political and career interests riding on whether he stays in the race.Mr. Giuliani is expected to announce his plans as soon as today, in the face of pressure from Republicans concerned that his decision to cancel campaign events signaled his exit from the contest against Hillary Rodham Clinton. Yet as Mr. Giuliani struggles to unravel the tangled medical, political and personal considerations, he is turning to City Hall aides, campaign advisers and personal friends whose agendas are not necessarily topped by concerns about his health, personal problems and future political viability.For example, members of Mr. Giuliani's paid campaign staff, most of whom are urging him to stay in, face the loss of their extraordinarily high public profiles, and potentially high fees, if the mayor skips the race.At City Hall, aides are faced with the prospect of losing their jobs -- or taking less influential positions in  Washington -- should Mr. Giuliani win, while Mr. Giuliani's personal friends will lose the status and influence that comes with being able to boast of having a mayor as a buddy.The chairman of the state Liberal Party, Raymond B. Harding, would be freed from a political vise if his close friend skipped the Senate race. Then he could steer the Liberal Party behind the Democratic team of Al Gore and Mrs. Clinton.And the chairman of the state Republican Party, William D. Powers, who has been urging Mr. Giuliani to stay the course, was described yesterday as increasingly worried that his party could lose control of the State Senate this fall if Mr. Giuliani was not on the top of the ticket.This swirl of conflicting pressures, several of Mr. Giuliani's advisers said yesterday, has meant that the mayor has been unable to take almost any advice at face value these last few days. And it has added a new level of complexity to what was already a difficult moment in his life: deciding his political future in the midst of a prostate cancer diagnosis and the breakup of his marriage.''There's an enormous amount of that going on,'' one of Mr. Giuliani's closest friends said yesterday. ''People are advising him for their own personal agenda.''After seven years in City Hall, Mr. Giuliani is accustomed to palace intrigue. But his unexpected deluge of difficulties, in combination with what has emerged as a once-in-a-lifetime career opportunity for so many people in his circles, has resulted in an unusually pitched atmosphere of mistrust in Mr. Giuliani's quarters.The mayor's aides have, over the last 48 hours, variously accused other people of leaking stories to try to push the mayor one way or another in his deliberations, or raised questions about the motivations of others in his circle.''The thing that has been very depressing has been the number of anonymous sources professing to know his mind and his heart,'' one of the mayor's associates said yesterday, ''and then expressing that knowledge in an anonymous manner, to try to move the decision one way or another, or just to finality.''At Gracie Mansion last night, Mr. Giuliani said he was still considering options for cancer treatment, as well as whether he would stay in the Senate race. He said that an article in this week's Newsweek, asserting that Mr. Giuliani had decided to undergo both surgery and radiation treatment and had all but decided to quit the Senate race, was ''a lie.''Mr. Giuliani's advisers agreed to discuss the complications that have clouded the decision-making process on the condition of anonymity.But some of the inside discussions with the mayor have at times slipped out. A number of the people who would like Mr. Giuliani to run -- and would benefit professionally if he did -- have advised him privately that he would suffer perhaps irreparable damage with the Republican Party if he pulled out now. Some advisers have also suggested to reporters that they write stories exploring those same themes, presumably to dramatize the point to Mr. Giuliani while he weighs his options.Mr. Giuliani has held a series of meetings with aides to discuss his future these last few days. For the most part, one adviser said, the mayor has listened to the advice without making comments, and his silence has fed a flow of speculation that has engulfed the mayor's anxious staff.Mr. Giuliani's advisers have split into three groups: his campaign aides, his City Hall staff and his personal friends, or kitchen cabinet.The conflicting loyalties of Mr. Giuliani's campaign staff have been the most apparent. Adam Goodman, his media consultant, has urged him to stay in the race, assuming his health is up to it, as has his pollster, Frank Luntz, and his campaign manager, Bruce J. Teitelbaum.The political skills of all three men are well respected. That said, all three have a great deal riding on Mr. Giuliani's staying in the race, including instant celebrity that comes with being associated with a race that is receiving international coverage, to the inevitable enhancement of their long-term career prospects if they guide Mr. Giuliani to victory. (Mr. Teitelbaum has seemingly enjoyed his jump from obscure mayoral chief of staff to regular guest on the Sunday morning talk shows.)There are immediate financial benefits as well, particularly for Mr. Goodman, the Florida-based media consultant. He is the producer of Mr. Giuliani's television spots, and in a race that is expected to be this expensive and media-driven, he stands to reap a huge amount of fees if the mayor proceeds.Among advisers not directly affiliated with the campaign, Mr. Harding has signaled to Mr. Giuliani that he thinks it might be best for the mayor if he did not run. He has been in a difficult situation from the moment Mr. Giuliani said he wanted the Liberal Party's support. Mr. Harding has seemed inclined to accede to Mr. Giuliani's request, though it could come with a high cost, since Mr. Gore has said he might not take the Liberal Party endorsement if the party backed Mr. Giuliani.In addition, if Mr. Giuliani backed out, it would be a big lift to the mayoral candidate Mr. Harding is likely to support, Alan G. Hevesi, the city comptroller. That is because if Mr. Giuliani wins, he will be succeeded by Mark J. Green, the public advocate, which would give him the advantage of incumbency in any battle with Mr. Hevesi for the Democratic mayoral nomination.One person involved in the deliberations said that Mr. Harding signaled that he was about to offer advice that might not necessarily be in his best interest by saying: ''O.K., now I'm putting on my L.P. hat.'' The abbreviation refers to the Liberal Party.The crucial people in Mr. Giuliani's City Hall circles, in particular Joseph J. Lhota, the deputy mayor for operations, are said to have advised Mr. Giuliani to stay in the race. However, there is some tension between Mr. Giuliani's campaign staff and his City Hall staff, with some of the mayor's political advisers saying they suspect that his City Hall aides are pushing him to quit the race to ensure their own continuing employment and influence in City Hall.Finally, there is Mr. Giuliani's so-called kitchen cabinet, which includes Peter Powers, his longtime friend; Elliot Cuker, an acting coach and car dealership owner; and Randy L. Levine, a former deputy mayor. Mr. Levine is said to have advised Mr. Giuliani to run if he can. But Mr. Cuker and Mr. Powers, who are considered among his two closest friends, are said to have pressed him to skip the race for Senate, all the more so in light of his diagnosis.
One of the top American commanders in the Persian Gulf war came under investigation in 1991 after a member of his unit complained that his troops had pummeled retreating Iraqi forces in an unprovoked attack two days after a cease-fire went into effect.One of the top American commanders in the Persian Gulf war came under investigation in 1991 after a member of his unit complained that his troops had pummeled retreating Iraqi forces in an unprovoked attack two days after a cease-fire went into effect.Military investigators, who fielded the anonymous complaint and completed a secret report in 1991, exonerated Barry R. McCaffrey, now a retired four-star Army general and President Clinton's top drug-control official. But questions about the attack have been revived by a report appearing in The New Yorker magazine on Monday that quotes senior Army officers, including one of the top officers on General McCaffrey's staff, as saying the attack was unjustified.Patrick Lamar, the operations officer of General McCaffrey's division, told the magazine that the attack was a ''giant hoax'' in which overwhelming firepower was used against an Iraqi armored force that put up little resistance.The article of Seymour M. hersh pits a tenacious investigative reporter against one of the nation's most agressive military men.Mr. Hersh first made his name by reporting on the massacre of Vietnamese civilians by Americans in the hamlet of My Lai. His 25,000-word article on General McCaffrey is the longest The New Yorker has published since 1993.In addition to challenging General McCaffrey's conduct, Mr. Hersh also asserts that some of the commander's troops fired on Iraqi prisoners. And he questions the integrity of the military's investigations of this and other allegations of gulf war misconduct, charging that critics were often either ignored or intimidated.But General McCaffrey insists that he has been the victim of a journalistic attack. He says Mr. Hersh pursued him for months and tried unsuccessfully to provide that he had committed felonies during his service in Vietnam and had stolen a bicycle as a child.And in recent weeks, General McCaffrey has mounted a pre-emptive campaign to make Mr. Hersh the issue, distributing letters to reporters by military officers complaining of Mr. Hersh's tactics, and directing journalists to the Army's in-house investigation, which concluded that the attack was provoked by the Iraqis and was within the cease-fire rules of engagement.''I have been dealing with the press for years, but nothing prepared me for this,'' General McCaffrey said in an interview.General McCaffrey has long had a reputation as an ambitious commander. He was badly wounded in Vietnam, but that did not shake his confidence or ardor for battle.As allied troops prepared to battle the Iraqis, General McCaffrey was in command of the Army's 24th Infantry Division, which had been commanded by H. Norman Schwarkopf, the allied commander in the gulf war, and which consisted of 26,000 soldiers and 8,600 vehicles.The task of General McCaffrey's division was to take the fight to Iraq's Republican Guard. Unlike some of his fellow Army commanders, who methodically and cautiously meaneuvered their units on the battle-field, General McCaffrey had his soldiers race through southern Iraq, and they were on the verge of cutting off many of the Iraqi forces when President Bush announced that a cease-fire would take place after 100 hours of ground combat.Mr. Hersh's article makes several allegations. One of the most sensational is that on Feb. 27, 1991, a unit of armored vehicles within General McCaffrey's division fired high-powered machine guns into a group of more than 350 disarmed Iraqi prisoners. General McCaffrey was not personally implicated in the episode, although Mr. Hersh suggests the general set a tone that encouraged use of excessive firepower.Mr. Hersh cites a tape of radio conversations during the episode that shows soldiers were horrified by what is protrayed as a panicky blunder by trigger-happy troops.According to Mr. Hersh, the Ameican captors piled the prisoner's confiscated weapons into a truck, drove it into the desert, and blew it up. The spectacular explosion apparently excited the drivers of nearby American fighting vehicles, who rolled to the scene and began blazing away with their machine guns.''Why are we shooting at these people, when they are not shooting us?'' one soldier asked on the tape cited by The New Yorker. ''It's murder,'' someone else said on the tape.General McCaffrey said that the soldier who made the tape was leavig the scene in a Humvee at the time and did not actually see what the armored vehicles were firing at. He said a subsequent Army investigation determined that not a single Iraqi prisoner was killed or injured.General McCaffrey's decisions immediately after the 1991 Persian Gulf war have long been the subject of debate. After a cease-fire was announced, an Iraqi unit trying to retreat stumbled into General McCaffrey's division, and there was an exchange of fire.Hundreds of armored vehicles and trucks were destroyed in the fight, and General McCaffrey told Cable News Network soon afterward that he believed 400 Iraqis had died.Some Army officers complained after the war that General McCaffrey had used the episode as an excuse to pummel the Iraqis in one of the most one-sided fights of the war. The chief operations officer of the Army's VII Corps, for example, declared that rules of engagement followed by his forces would have precluded such an attack.The dispute has been explored in several books, and was the subject of a 1991 investigation by the Army's Criminal Investigation Command. The investigation cleared the general, and he has cited it this past week in his defense. Mr. Hersh's account, however, suggests for the first time that the discomfort over the attack on March 2, 1991, also ran deep within General McCaffrey's own 24th Infantry Division, citing comments by his operations officer.Mr. Hersh's interpretation of the fight is sharply contested by General McCaffrey. Mr. Hersh suggests that General McCaffrey deliberately provoked the fighting by deploying his troops in front of a causeway over Lake Hammar and, thus, along a likely Iraqi retreat route.He also quotes officers as saying that many of the Iraqi tanks were being carried by trucks and that their turrets were turned to the rear; that the initial shots from the Iraqi side were not a real attack but a sign of panic upon encountering the Americans blocking their retreat; and that McCaffrey ordered additional waves of assault long after any sign of resistance from the Iraqis.''There was no need to be shooting at anybody,'' Lt. Gen James H. Johnson Jr., who commanded the 82nd Airborne, is quoted as saying. ''They couldn't surrender fast enough. The war was over.''General McCaffrey, however, insisted that Mr. Hersh's account was skewed. He said he moved his troops up to a boundary decided by higher-level Army officers, who were over-seeing the war from Saudi Arabia.And General McCaffrey added that he had no reason to think his units were astride an escape route because he believed that the cause-way had been destroyed by American warplanes. He also denied that most of the Iraqi tanks had their gun turned to the rear and insisted that he carried out the attack to protect his men.''This whole notion that the tanks were up on trucks and that their guns were all to the rear is bull,'' he said. ''This was an armed unit moving through the desert.''Gen. Gary Luck, retired, the commander of the XVIII Airborne Corps during the gulf war and General McCaffrey's superior, said he went to the battle scene immediately after the fight and concluded that General McCaffrey had acted appropriately, ''I think it was a fair fight,'' he said.General McCaffrey has also released a letter by General Schwarzkopf to Mr. Hersh in which the allied commander said he was not aware of any impropriety in the attack.General McCaffrey has cited the Army investigation in his defense. The investigation has received scant public attention until now. Leon E. Panetta, a senior White House official at the time of the general's appointment as President Clinton's top anti-drug man in 1996, told The New Yorker that the Clinton administration was unaware of the investigation back then.But Robert S. Weiner, spokesman for General McCaffrey, says that the existence of the investigation was not a secret, and that it was known to the Senate committee that confirmed the general's appointment.The report into actions by General McCaffrey's division in the gulf war was 2,100 pages long, and based on interviews with some 200 witnesses.The allegations about the March 2 attack did not apparently cloud General McCaffrey's career. After the gulf war, he was promoted several times, and served as the four-star commander of American forces in Latin America.For all the criticism in the New Yorker account, General McCaffrey said he was relieved that Mr. Hersh had dropped many earlier allegations, including those involving his conduct in Vietnam. He said that because of the episode he has gathered an array of material on the gulf war and plans to write a book.Correction:  May 16, 2000, Tuesday  Because of a production error, Page A6 was omitted from some copies yesterday and replaced by a duplicate of Page A11. The missing page carried an article about a report in The New Yorker magazine describing a 1991 investigation of Gen. Barry R. McCaffrey over an attack on retreating Iraqi forces after a cease-fire in the Gulf war. The omitted article may be found at  www.nytimes.com. Or readers may request it from Production Quality Control, The New York Times, 229 West 43rd Street, New York, N.Y. 10036-3959; telephone (212) 556-1992. E-mail: quality@nytimes.com. (Include a postal address.)Correction: May 16, 2000, TuesdayBecause of a production error, Page A6 was omitted from some copies yesterday and replaced by a duplicate of Page A11. The missing page carried an article about a report in The New Yorker magazine describing a 1991 investigation of Gen. Barry R. McCaffrey over an attack on retreating Iraqi forces after a cease-fire in the Gulf war. The omitted article may be found at  www.nytimes.com. Or readers may request it from Production Quality Control, The New York Times, 229 West 43rd Street, New York, N.Y. 10036-3959; telephone (212) 556-1992. E-mail: quality@nytimes.com. (Include a postal address.)<br><br>
In medieval times, right-handed warriors had a distinct advantage in swordfights. They held their shield with their left hand -- over their heart -- and thus lived to fight another day, and to reproduce, even after they had been stabbed.That, suggested Thomas Carlyle, the 19th century British writer, is why so many more people are right-handed. The lefties never lived to have offspring.In medieval times, right-handed warriors had a distinct advantage in swordfights. They held their shield with their left hand -- over their heart -- and thus lived to fight another day, and to reproduce, even after they had been stabbed.That, suggested Thomas Carlyle, the 19th century British writer, is why so many more people are right-handed. The lefties never lived to have offspring.It is a preposterous theory. Chances are, Carlyle, a brilliant essayist and himself left-handed, offered it tongue in cheek to tweak his contemporary Charles Darwin, whom he did not care for.But the truth is, the question of what causes people to be right-handed or left-handed is nearly as much of a mystery today as it was when Carlyle addressed it in 1871.The latest word comes from a geneticist at the National Cancer Institute laboratory here who has been working for years with yeast and mutant mice and who has developed a novel theory that he believes will explain why 9 out of 10 people are right-handed, why left-handed parents are more likely to have left-handed children and why identical twins often have different handedness.The geneticist, Dr. Amar J. S. Klar, hypothesizes that most people have a specific dominant gene that makes them right-handed. But about 20 percent of people, under this theory, lack the right-handed gene, and these people without the gene have a 50-50 possibility -- a random chance -- of being right-handed or left-handed.Whether a person has or lacks this gene, Dr. Klar supposes, is a function of conventional genetics, just like eye color or baldness.The gene has yet to be identified -- assuming it exists. Dr. Klar is assembling a group of about 100 families that he plans to subject to genetic testing. If everything goes right, he said in an interview in his lab, he hopes to be able to prove his theory by isolating a right-handed gene, perhaps within three years.Across the continent, at the University of British Columbia in Vancouver, Dr. Stanley Coren, a psychologist, has been working for years to document his view that left-handedness has nothing to do with genetic variables and almost everything to do with prenatal traumas -- with some sort of stress that damages the fetus.Many researchers around the world do not take the all-or-nothing stands of Dr. Klar and Dr. Coren but hold that both genetics and development are involved. But what are the genetic elements? What are the developmental ones? There is no consensus.The question of what causes handedness is interesting as a matter of curiosity and pure science. It is hard to think of another behavioral difference so observable and so fundamental that has not been explained.But there is also a practical reason to want to know the answer. Left-handedness is closely identified with mental illnesses like schizophrenia and language difficulties like dyslexia and stuttering. If scientists knew the connection, they might be better able to deal with the problems.''I'm not interested in handedness per se,'' Dr. Klar said. ''I'm interested in how the brain works, and handedness is the only external feature we can monitor, because we can't look at the brain directly.''Born and reared in India, Dr. Klar, who is right-handed, came to this country to attend graduate school at the University of Wisconsin and did postdoctoral work at the University of California at Berkeley. Before going to the National Cancer Institute, he worked under Dr. James D. Watson (a lefty), the co-discoverer of the structure of DNA, at the Cold Spring Harbor laboratory on Long Island.His studies of handedness, he said, began with his interest in the fact that yeast, single-cell organisms, have two distinct sides. His theory about the right-handed gene and the absence of this gene in lefties, he said, grew out of studies of mutant mice.In most mice, the heart is on the left side. But there is a mutant strain of mice that have hearts on the right. When the mutants mate, half the offspring have hearts on the left and half on the right.Last year, Dr. Klar said, geneticists identified a gene that is present in normal mice but totally missing in the mutants. ''If it can work in mice,'' Dr. Klar asked, ''why can't it work for handedness in people?''The beauty of the theory is that it explains a phenomenon that has long baffled geneticists: how can identical twins with exactly the same genetic makeup have different handedness, as 18 percent of them do? Dr. Klar's explanation is that these twins lack the right-handed gene, and each one has an equal chance of being right-handed or left-handed.He dismisses as inconclusive studies that militate against his genetic theory, showing that more men than women are left-handed and that left-handed mothers have a disproportionate number of left-handed sons. Possibly, he said, these findings can be explained by cultural factors like a tendency of left-handed males to be more stubborn than left-handed females in resisting efforts to switch them to using their right hands.Hoping to prove his hypothesis, Dr. Klar plans to test blood samples or cheek swabs from the members of 100 families in which at least one parent is right-handed and two of the children are left-handed. ''I'm looking for markers in their DNA to see how often these particular children inherit particular markers,'' he said.He has a rigid definition of what constitutes right-handedness. He asks people which hand they use to throw a ball, use a spoon, saw, sew, shoot marbles, bowl, cut with a knife, cut with scissors, hammer and write. He does not consider people right-handed who routinely use their left hands for any of these activities.As a research biologist who spends his life testing hypotheses, Dr. Klar said, he is all too familiar with going down blind alleys. But he said he was confident he would be able to isolate the right-handed gene.Others experts wonder. One skeptic is Dr. Coren, the psychologist in British Columbia, who created a splash about a decade ago with his book, ''The Left-Handed Syndrome'' (Free Press, 1992), which maintains that lefties die younger and are more prone to accidents than right-handers. (Dr. Coren's avocation, incidentally, is writing about dogs, and he has published such page-turners as ''How to Speak Dog'' and ''What Do Dogs Know?'')Dr. Coren is convinced that humans are naturally right-handed and that left-handedness is largely a consequence of what he calls ''birth stress,'' by which he means factors like an unnatural placement that causes damage to the fetus in the womb.Prenatal brain injuries explain why a larger percentage of left-handers have psychological and emotional problems, he said. He believes left-handedness runs in families because of a predisposition of the women in those families to have difficult pregnancies. As for the paradox of identical twins, he said twins are always subjected to birth stress because of crowding in the womb.Two other scientists who have studied handedness -- Dr. Walter F. McKeever, a psychologist at the University of Toledo in Ohio, and Dr. Daniel H. Geschwind, a neurologist at the University of California at Los Angeles -- said they believed that handedness was heavily based in genetics. But they said they doubted a single gene was responsible, as Dr. Klar suggests. And they give more weight than Dr. Klar to developmental factors.''Handedness is a complex behavior,'' Dr. Geschwind said, ''and no complex behavior has ever been shown to be due to only a single gene without any environmental influence.''But Dr. Klar is undaunted. ''What's good for yeast should be good for mice, and what's good for mice should be good for men,'' he said. ''Biology is biology, and DNA is DNA.''Left-Handed Royals and Other Sinister Facts*About 90 percent of people are right-handed. Most of the rest are distinctly left-handed, though some are ambidextrous to one degree or another.*When both parents are right-handed, 92 percent of their children are. When one parent is left-handed, about 80 percent of the children are right-handed. When both parents are left-handed, about half their children are right-handed.*Left-handedness runs in families. In the British royal family, for example, the Queen Mother, Queen Elizabeth II, Prince Charles and Prince William are all left-handed.*Males are somewhat more likely than females to be left-handed. There is some evidence that the children of left-handed mothers and right-handed fathers are more likely to be left-handed than are the children of right-handed mothers and left-handed fathers.*In a striking 18 percent of identical twins, products of the same egg with exactly the same genetic makeup, one twin is right-handed and the other left-handed. There also seems to be a higher proportion of fraternal twins with different handedness than is the case with other siblings.*The left hemisphere of the brain controls the motor coordination of right-handed people, and the right hemisphere controls it in lefties. In almost all instances, the speech and language of right-handed people are controlled by the left side of their brain. But in left-handed people, the right hemisphere controls speech and language in at least 30 percent of the cases.*A much larger percentage of young people than old people are left-handed. This may be, as one researcher suggests, because lefties die earlier. Or it may be because in an earlier time, natural lefties were taught to write and perform other tasks with their right hands and now think of themselves as right-handed.*A disproportionate number of lefties seem to be geniuses (Einstein), artists (Leonardo, Michelangelo, Picasso) and athletes (Babe Ruth). A disproportionate number also seem to be criminals (Jack the Ripper, Billy the Kid).*Except for Jimmy Carter, every president for the last quarter-century has been left-handed. There is no question about Gerald R. Ford, George Bush or Bill Clinton. Ronald Reagan writes and eats with his right hand. But Edmund Morris, the Reagan biographer, has little doubt that Mr. Reagan is a natural lefty who is one of those who were trained to use their right hands. In the movies, Mr. Morris says, Mr. Reagan always twirled and shot pistols with his left hand, and as president, he always waved with his left hand. The presidential string is about to be broken. Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush are both right-handed.
Jack Kemp, the former Republican candidate for vice president, and Henry G. Cisneros, the former secretary of Housing and Urban Development, are leading an unusual coalition of conservatives and liberals that is beginning a major campaign to persuade Congress to ease the nation's immigration laws.Mr. Kemp and Mr. Cisneros are scheduled to announce an initiative today in conjunction with immigrant groups and the nation's Roman Catholic bishops that calls for admitting more immigrants into the United States and granting amnesty to hundreds of thousands of illegal immigrants.Jack Kemp, the former Republican candidate for vice president, and Henry G. Cisneros, the former secretary of Housing and Urban Development, are leading an unusual coalition of conservatives and liberals that is beginning a major campaign to persuade Congress to ease the nation's immigration laws.Mr. Kemp and Mr. Cisneros are scheduled to announce an initiative today in conjunction with immigrant groups and the nation's Roman Catholic bishops that calls for admitting more immigrants into the United States and granting amnesty to hundreds of thousands of illegal immigrants.The coalition brings together conservatives who view immigrants as an important engine for the economy with religious leaders and immigrant organizations who worry that many hard-working illegal immigrants are consigned to exploitative jobs and lives with little stability.''What we're seeing is the beginning of a new pro-immigrant alliance that is likely to reshape immigration policy,'' said Frank Sharry, executive director of the National Immigration Forum, a Washington-based group that supports the easing of restrictions on immigrants.The coalition includes Americans for Tax Reform, the United States Catholic Conference, the Arab-American Institute, the National Asian Pacific American Legal Consortium and the National Coalition for Haitian Rights. Another coalition member is the National Retail Federation, one of many business groups that says that with the unemployment rate so low, businesses sorely need immigrant workers to fill their jobs.''I was at a meeting with the Chamber of Commerce, the truckers organization and other businessmen, and they all said the biggest problem we face is, we're running out of workers,'' said Grover Norquist, president of Americans for Tax Reform.The coalition's statement comes as the presumptive presidential nominees, Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush, have sought to outmaneuver each other in wooing Hispanic-Americans and other immigrant groups.For Mr. Kemp, the new effort is consistent with his longtime practice of prodding many Republican leaders to jettison their anti-immigrant proposals.In a statement to be issued today, the coalition will back a proposal, embraced by President Clinton and the business community, to increase the annual ceiling for the number of immigrants with high-tech skills. But the coalition said Congress should not stop there in changing immigration laws.The coalition called for granting legal status to more than 300,000 immigrants who fled wars and political chaos in Haiti, El Salvador, Honduras and Guatemala and applied unsuccessfully for refugee status. The coalition said these immigrants should be treated the same as those from Cuba and Nicaragua who have been granted refugee status.The coalition also backed granting legal status to more than 100,000 other longtime residents who have been in the United States since before 1986.''It is getting irritating that the only immigration crisis that Congress is prepared to address is the high-tech community's crisis, while there is crisis in many other areas in immigration policy,'' said Cecilia Munoz, vice president for policy of the National Council of La Raza, the nation's largest Hispanic civil rights group and a signer of the statement.Last Thursday, President Clinton asked Congress to provide 200,000 visas for high-tech workers in each of the next three years, a major increase from existing law, which limits the number of such visas to 107,500 in 2001.Mr. Clinton also called for granting legal status to some groups of longtime illegal immigrants, although many lawmakers have balked at that proposal in the past.K. C. McAlpin, deputy director of the Federation for American Immigration Reform, which pushes for stricter rules on immigration, opposed the proposals to grant amnesty and increase immigration quotas.''Our reaction is basically the same as the American people -- every time they're polled they say they want less immigration not more,'' Mr. McAlpin said. ''The American people are adamantly opposed to rewarding people who break our laws to come here illegally.''That view clashed sharply with the one adopted by the Roman Catholic bishops. Kevin Applebee, director of migration and refugee policy for the United States Catholic Conference, said, ''The bishops strongly believe that the groups involved have lived in this country for several years, established ties and built equities and thus are deserving an opportunity to remain in our country on a permanent basis.''Officials who helped negotiate the statement said several labor unions with many immigrant members were debating whether to sign. The officials said those unions hesitated for fear of clashing with the A.F.L.-C.I.O., which has opposed expanding programs that grant visas to high-tech and other skilled workers.
Since it was established in 1935, Social Security has had two fundamental principles. It has been a guaranteed government benefit. And it has been self-financed, paid for out of payroll taxes levied on workers and employers.In reopening the debate today over how best to maintain the solvency of the retirement system as the population ages, Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush each challenged one of those principles.Since it was established in 1935, Social Security has had two fundamental principles. It has been a guaranteed government benefit. And it has been self-financed, paid for out of payroll taxes levied on workers and employers.In reopening the debate today over how best to maintain the solvency of the retirement system as the population ages, Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush each challenged one of those principles.Taking one of the biggest political risks of the presidential campaign so far, Mr. Bush proposed allowing individual workers to invest a part of their payroll taxes through private accounts. His plan would give workers an opportunity to capture some of the riches that Wall Street creates, but would also leave those workers to suffer the financial consequences if their timing or judgment is off.Mr. Gore wants to maintain the guaranteed nature of the Social Security benefit, allowing it to remain a bulwark against poverty in old age. But through a somewhat complicated mechanism, Mr. Gore is calling for the bill to be paid in part over the long run out of general tax revenues -- in effect, heaving the problem onto the shoulders of taxpayers three decades from now.Those differing approaches to dealing with the financial problems that threaten to afflict Social Security are at the heart of a longstanding ideological dispute about the relationship between government and individuals.Like most Democrats, Mr. Gore is comfortable with government as a guarantor and sees Social Security as a collective commitment that binds the generations. Like most Republicans, Mr. Bush is dedicated to giving more power and responsibility to individuals.A few years ago, President Clinton and the Republican leadership in Congress tried to find some common ground and failed.In elevating the call for private accounts to the presidential campaign, Mr. Bush is asking for a mandate to break the deadlock. Although Mr. Gore's approach would eventually require a fundamental change in  the nature of the system as well, the vice president has cast himself as the defender of a program that has proved to be perhaps the most popular and most effective of any administered in Washington.It is already clear that the clash between the two candidates will be supercharged, with Mr. Gore in particular unleashing a sustained attack on Mr. Bush's position. And the more heated the clash, the greater the risk that the debate will so polarize voters and unnerve politicians that it blocks progress for years.''It is a good issue to debate as long as the discussion remains civil,'' said Robert D. Reischauer, a former director of the Congressional Budget Office who is now president of the Urban Institute, a research group. ''It could easily backfire and lead to a situation where the lesson coming out of this campaign is, 'Don't try and deal forthrightly with the American people on this issue when there isn't an immediate crisis.' ''Polls suggest that voters are split. In a survey conducted last week, The New York Times/CBS News Poll found that 51 percent thought allowing individuals to invest a part of their payroll taxes was a good idea, and 45 percent thought it was a bad one.Many Democrats and some Republicans wonder why Mr. Bush has chosen to wade into such a polarizing issue. ''Politically it's not'' a great idea, said Senator Judd Gregg, a Republican from New Hampshire who is one of the most prominent advocates of adding private accounts to Social Security.''But it's a genuine act of leadership,'' Senator Gregg said, ''because if he's successful, he will have broken the iron triangle of demagoguery -- Gore, Gephardt and the labor unions. And he'll have a national mandate to do something in this area.'' His reference was to Representative Richard A. Gephardt of Missouri, the House Democratic leader.But both sides also have electoral strategies in mind. For Republicans, putting Social Security on the front burner is an effort to attract what they see as an emerging investor class. More than 50 percent of households now invest in the market directly or indirectly. Many of them have had great success as Wall Street has boomed, and are presumed by Republicans to want greater control over their finances.Republicans also see private accounts as a way to grab the attention of young voters, who tend to believe that Social Security will not be around when they retire.Yet Democrats think that in the end the only groups that will be motivated to vote on the basis of the candidates' positions on Social Security will be the elderly and those workers nearing retirement. Those groups have consistently opposed any fundamental changes to Social Security.''The Bush campaign is betting that young people will end up voting on this issue,'' said Geoff Garin, a Democratic pollster. ''But recent history is pretty clear that the people who vote on Social Security tend to be in their 50's and older, and their vote is based on making sure that the system that's protecting their parents is there to protect them.''Mr. Bush is trying to turn attention to the trade-off at the core of Mr. Gore's plan, which is built around eliminating the $3.5 trillion in national debt held by the public and capturing the interest savings for Social Security.When all the complexities are stripped away, Mr. Gore's plan would leave the government in financially sound condition -- but would also transfer to future generations of taxpayers the burden of keeping Social Security solvent.''The Gore plan will eventually require a 25 percent increase in income taxes -- the largest in our history -- or a substantial reduction in benefits,'' Mr. Bush said.Mr. Gore is trying to keep the debate focused on the risks inherent  in investing Social Security money in the financial markets -- and is emphasizing that Mr. Bush's plan would leave less money to pay down the debt. The Bush plan ''would weaken our national economy,'' Mr. Gore said, and create the risk of millions of retirees ''left without enough to make ends meet.''Mr. Gore said one thing today that Mr. Bush would no doubt agree with.''There is a fundamental difference on this issue in this election,'' Mr. Gore said, ''which offers the country the most critical choice on Social Security since it was first enacted in 1935.''''BUSH AND GORE PROPOSALS''Different Approaches to Social SecuritySocial Security faces a financial shortfall as the baby boom generation ages. Based on current estimates, the retirement system would spend its reserves by 2037, leaving it able to pay only 75 percent of promised benefits after that point. To deal with that problem, Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush are proposing different solutions.THE GORE PLANIt is built around paying off the $3.5 trillion in national debt held by the public and using the savings that would have paid the interest on the debt to bolster Social Security.The vice president would use the portion of the projected federal budget surplus generated by excess Social Security payroll revenues -- or more than $2 trillion over the next decade -- to reduce the federal debt. His plan calculates that the debt could be paid by 2013.Starting in 2011, Mr. Gore would begin transferring to Social Security an amount equal to the interest saved through reduction of the public debt. The amount would start at around $100 billion a year, and would grow to more than $200 billion a year by 2015. By doing so, Mr. Gore's plan would extend Social Security's solvency to 2050 without any cuts in benefits.The money Mr. Gore would transfer into Social Security would not be cash, but instead i.o.u.'s that would have to be paid out of general tax revenues. In that way, Mr. Gore's plan would obligate taxpayers decades in the future to pay to keep the system afloat out of general revenues from income taxes -- a change from the current system under which Social Security is financed out of payroll taxes.THE BUSH PLANMr. Bush's approach is built around the idea that the only alternative to cutting benefits or raising taxes is to increase the rate of return on the money going into the Social Security system. The best way to accomplish that goal, in his view, is to allow all workers to invest part of their payroll taxes in private accounts.Mr. Bush has provided few details, saying that the specifics would have to be worked out in bipartisan negotiations. There are a variety of approaches to establishing individual investment accounts, and most would use about 2 percentage points of the 12.4 percent payroll tax that goes to pay Social Security benefits.Any investment plan that used 2 percentage points of the payroll tax would use about $1 trillion of the Social Security surplus over the next decade. That money would otherwise go to debt reduction, so Mr. Bush's plan would leave the nation with a larger debt than Mr. Gore's plan.Historically, investing in the stock market has yielded a high rate of return, better than 7 percent from 1926 through 1997, according to the Bush campaign. But there have been long periods when the market has been down, and not every investor has chosen the right stocks. Investing in safer alternatives, like bonds, reduces the rate of return along with the risk. And Democrats point out that most workers are already subject to considerable risk through 401(k)'s and other retirement accounts.THE 2000 CAMPAIGN: THE CONTEXT
An influential senior House Democrat from New York signaled today that he is leaning in favor of a decisive China trade bill, as the measure's supporters and opponents geared up for a furious week of lobbying before next week's scheduled vote.Representative Charles B. Rangel, the ranking Democrat on the House Ways and Means Committee, said in a telephone interview that he is still officially undecided on a measure to grant China permanent normal trading privileges.An influential senior House Democrat from New York signaled today that he is leaning in favor of a decisive China trade bill, as the measure's supporters and opponents geared up for a furious week of lobbying before next week's scheduled vote.Representative Charles B. Rangel, the ranking Democrat on the House Ways and Means Committee, said in a telephone interview that he is still officially undecided on a measure to grant China permanent normal trading privileges.But then Mr. Rangel challenged several of the opponents' main arguments. ''I don't understand why labor would make this their litmus test on human rights or give a priority to human rights in China when there are so many problems in the U.S.,'' he said.On the question of whether the World Trade Organization could adequately police Chinese trade violations once Beijing joined the international body, as is expected, Mr. Rangel said, ''If we have no leverage in the W.T.O., what do we do?''Organized labor and the Clinton administration have heavily courted Mr. Rangel, in part because they believe he may influence the votes of at least two other members of the Congressional Black Caucus, Gregory W. Meeks of New York and Eva M. Clayton of North Carolina.Mr. Rangel said he still wanted to discuss the measure with fellow Democrats on the Ways and Means Committee before the panel meets on Wednesday to vote on the measure. Approval by the pro-trade committee is considered all but certain.One factor Mr. Rangel said he is weighing is how the China vote will affect labor's support for Democrats in the November elections. If Democrats reclaim the House, Mr. Rangel would become the committee's first black chairman. ''We need labor's enthusiastic support,'' Mr. Rangel said.And in a significant lift for the Clinton administration today, the United States International Trade Commission voted to levy punitive anti-dumping duties on apple juice concentrate imports from China. The administration is trying to convince lawmakers that it can regulate trade with China to make sure that American producers are not swamped by Chinese imports produced at prices deemed below cost.The 5-0 ruling by the trade commission imposes a 52 percent duty on Chinese apple juice concentrate. It backs up a ruling by the Commerce Department, which determined last month that China was selling the juice concentrate in the American market for about half of what it cost to produce.At the White House today, the spokesman Joe Lockhart said President Clinton will hold individual meetings this week with many of the undecided lawmakers -- about 25 to 30 in both the Democratic and Republican camps -- and step up a campaign that has involved Mr. Clinton, Vice President Gore and Cabinet members who are calling wavering legislators.Mr. Meeks has already felt the brunt of the lobbying onslaught. The freshman Democrat said he heard Mr. Clinton's most persuasive arguments while he and a handful of other uncommitted lawmakers flew aboard Air Force One last week after the funeral of Cardinal John O'Connor. But labor leaders have also buttonholed Mr. Meeks, whose district includes Kennedy International Airport.''It's been intense,'' Mr. Meeks told Reuters. ''Any number of labor leaders have called and continue to call, even when I was at Cardinal O'Connor's funeral. There were a few labors who came up to me and said, 'We need your vote. We want to talk to you some more.' ''Many state governors are also turning up the pressure, including the Republican governor of Massachusetts, Paul Cellucci, who is lobbying three undecided House Democrats from his state: Martin T. Meehan, Richard E. Neal and Edward J. Markey.Ratcheting up pressure from business groups, the U.S. Chamber of Commerce on Wednesday will launch a new radio campaign targeting about 10 undecided and opposed lawmakers.Opponents also planned a week of rallies and counter-advertising campaigns. Representative John Baldacci, a Maine Democrat, said today he would vote against the measure ''absent serious and substantive'' parallel legislation that permits Congressional oversight of China's compliance with trade and other international agreements.
Following are excerpts from the prepared text of Gov. George W. Bush's speech yesterday about Social Security and Medicare, as provided by the Bush campaign. Mr. Bush spoke at a center for the elderly in Rancho Cucamonga, Calif. Also included are excerpts from the prepared text of Vice President Al Gore's speech on those issues yesterday at Beaver College in Glenside, Pa.Mr. Bush's RemarksWe are nearing Social Security's greatest test. Eight years from now, the massive baby-boomer generation will begin drawing benefits. Their lives will be long and healthy. And within two decades, there simply won't be enough younger workers to pay the benefits earned by the old.Following are excerpts from the prepared text of Gov. George W. Bush's speech yesterday about Social Security and Medicare, as provided by the Bush campaign. Mr. Bush spoke at a center for the elderly in Rancho Cucamonga, Calif. Also included are excerpts from the prepared text of Vice President Al Gore's speech on those issues yesterday at Beaver College in Glenside, Pa.Mr. Bush's RemarksWe are nearing Social Security's greatest test. Eight years from now, the massive baby-boomer generation will begin drawing benefits. Their lives will be long and healthy. And within two decades, there simply won't be enough younger workers to pay the benefits earned by the old.If we do nothing to reform the system, the year 2037 will be the moment of financial collapse. The system will be insolvent, with deficits in the trillions of dollars, requiring either a massive cut in benefits or a massive increase in taxes.At a time for leadership, for long-term thinking, my opponent proposes a Band-Aid approach. He says, ''If it ain't broke, don't fix it.'' But in the lifetime of some people in this room, it will be broke, and we must fix it. With every day of delay this becomes more difficult. For eight years, the Clinton-Gore administration has failed to act. And now Al Gore wants to pass the burden on to future generations. The Gore plan will eventually require either a 25 percent increase in income taxes, the largest in our history, or a substantial reduction in benefits. . . .First, we must not change Social Security for those now retired, or nearing retirement. Let me put this plainly. For those on Social Security or close to receiving it, nothing will change. Government has made a commitment, and you have made your plans. These promises will be honored. Yet, without reform, younger workers face a great risk -- a lifetime of paying taxes for benefits they may never receive. The reforms I have in mind will actually increase their retirement income.Second, all Social Security funds in the federal surplus must stay where they belong, dedicated to Social Security. In my economic plan, more than $2 trillion of the federal surplus is locked away for Social Security. For years, politicians in both parties have dipped into the trust fund to pay for more spending. And I will stop it.Third, the payroll tax must not be raised. We cannot tax our way to reform.Fourth, reform should include personal retirement accounts for young people, an element of all the major bipartisan plans. The idea works very simply. A young worker can take some portion of his or her payroll tax and put it in a fund that invests in stocks and bonds. We will establish basic standards of safety and soundness, so that investments are only in steady, reliable funds. There will be no fly-by-night speculators or day trading. And money in this account could only be used for retirement, or passed along as an inheritance.Right now, the real return people get from what they put into Social Security is a dismal 2 percent a year. Over the long term, sound investments yield about a 6 percent return. Investing that 4 percent difference, over a lifetime, can show dramatic results. A worker who invests even a limited portion of his or her paycheck could, over a career, end up with hundreds of thousands of dollars for retirement. . . .There is a fundamental difference between my opponent and me. He trusts only government to manage our retirement. I trust individual Americans. I trust Americans to make their own decisions and manage their own money.Let me be clear. Personal accounts are not a substitute for Social Security. They involve only a limited percentage of the payroll tax, so the safety net remains strong. Let me say this again: For those who are retired or near retirement, there will be no changes at all to your Social Security. But we can and must give younger workers the option of new opportunities. . . .Our nation must reform Medicare, and, in doing so, ensure that prescription drugs are affordable and available for every senior who needs them. As with Social Security, Medicare reform must be guided by clear tenets. . . .When I am president, I will lead Republicans and Democrats to reform and strengthen Medicare and set it on firm financial ground.And I make this pledge to seniors: Every senior will have access to prescription drug benefits.Prescription drugs are becoming the treatment of choice. Drugs are often more cost-effective than surgery or hospitalization, with fewer risks and better results. And the picture gets better year by year. By one estimate, suppliers are now working on more than 600 new medicines to treat the causes of disability among seniors.But prescription drugs can be expensive. The average senior already pays $450 each year in out-of-pocket drug expenses. Twelve percent of Medicare beneficiaries have drug bills of $1,000 or more. Ninety-eight percent of health plans today offer some form of prescription drug benefit. Yet Medicare does not. And this must change.Mr. Gore's RemarksSocial Security is a solemn compact between the generations. It is a basic guarantee of retirement security, built on a guaranteed minimum benefit. No matter what is happening on Wall Street, no matter how the economy is doing, Social Security is supposed to be there to guarantee a decent retirement for every American.We know that many people can build up extra retirement savings through private investment and I.R.A.'s. That's important, and I support it. Investing in the stock market is not only good for individual Americans, it's good for America.But that kind of private investment is meant not to replace Social Security, but to build on the foundation of Social Security. If we turn Social Security into a system of winners and losers, we will be jeopardizing retirement security for too many Americans and, in the end, we will all have to pay to make up the difference.I've laid out a detailed plan to reform and strengthen Social Security, a plan that is based on fiscal responsibility and debt reduction.If I'm entrusted with the presidency, I'll balance the federal budget every year, and pay down our national debt every year, putting America on the road to becoming debt-free by the year 2013. That's the only way we can get ready to meet our obligations through Social Security.Then I'll make sure we use the budget surplus and the money we save from paying down the debt to save Social Security first. I'll devote all the interest savings from debt reduction to the Social Security trust fund. That way, we can keep Social Security solvent until at least 2050.There is a fundamental difference on this issue in this election, which offers the country the most critical choice on Social Security since it was first enacted in 1935. Because there is a right way to reform Social Security, and a wrong way.George W. Bush outlined his approach in a speech this morning. We still don't know all the details of his plan, but we do know that he is proposing to partially privatize Social Security.Today, when Wall Street is booming, I know that plan sounds appealing. It probably sounds like an easy way to make more money, and have more control over your retirement.But in reality, the Bush Social Security privatization plan would weaken our national economy and undermine the basic guarantee of a minimum decent retirement. It would weaken our economy because it would make it impossible to pay down our national debt. It would cost about $1 trillion over 10 years to meet today's obligations through Social Security while allowing people to set up these individual accounts. And at the same time, Governor Bush is proposing a huge tax cut of nearly $2 trillion.The numbers just don't add up, and under the Bush plan, a serious reduction of our national debt is simply impossible. . . .The Bush Social Security privatization plan also threatens the Social Security guarantee for future generations of retirees. That guarantee is the whole purpose of Social Security. Yet under the Bush plan, you could lose some or all of the money you invest, and millions could be left without enough to make ends meet.Today, in The Dallas Morning News, Governor Bush was asked whether his plan would guarantee that future beneficiaries would receive no less than they would have under today's system. His answer, ''Maybe, maybe not.''In other words, Governor Bush admits that his plan takes the ''security'' out of Social Security. Well, I believe you deserve a guarantee, not a ''maybe.''
Casting the overhaul of the Social Security system as a ''test of presidential candidates,'' Gov. George W. Bush today proposed a fundamental change in the retirement system that would allow workers to choose how to invest some of their payroll taxes.With his formal call for the introduction of individual retirement accounts, Mr. Bush, the presumptive Republican presidential nominee, began a debate that could dominate the campaign. He and Vice President Al Gore differ sharply over how to meet the fiscal challenge posed by the retirement of baby boomers.Casting the overhaul of the Social Security system as a ''test of presidential candidates,'' Gov. George W. Bush today proposed a fundamental change in the retirement system that would allow workers to choose how to invest some of their payroll taxes.With his formal call for the introduction of individual retirement accounts, Mr. Bush, the presumptive Republican presidential nominee, began a debate that could dominate the campaign. He and Vice President Al Gore differ sharply over how to meet the fiscal challenge posed by the retirement of baby boomers.Although Social Security has long been considered the ''third rail'' of politics that a candidate touches at his peril, Mr. Bush took a gamble that in the new economy, with nearly 50 percent of American households now owning stock, his proposal would prove appealing.''There is a fundamental difference between my opponent and me,'' Mr. Bush said in an appearance at a center for the elderly here. ''He trusts the government to manage our retirement. I trust individual Americans.'' [Excerpts, Page A18.]''I trust Americans to make their own decisions and manage their own money,'' he said.Mr. Bush also embraced a bipartisan proposal for Medicare that would reshape it by giving beneficiaries fixed amounts of money to choose from various health plans.A few hours later outside Philadelphia, Mr. Gore came out squarely against the plan, calling it dangerous for individual taxpayers and for the economy overall. ''If we turn the Social Security system into a system of winners and losers,'' he said, ''we will be jeopardizing retirement security for too many Americans, and in the end we will all have to pay to make up the differences.''The sharp debate comes at a time when demographic changes will soon threaten the solvency of Social Security. The retirement system will start paying out more in benefits than it is taking in in payroll taxes starting in 2015 because of the retirement of the baby-boom generation. Under current projections, by 2037 it will be able to pay out only 75 percent in benefits.Shifting some of the payroll tax into individual retirement accounts would amount to the most far-reaching change in Social Security since its inception in the Depression. As Social Security has worked for decades, current retirees are paid from the payroll taxes of current workers; under the Bush plan, workers would be able to use a portion of their payroll taxes and invest them for their own retirement.Mr. Bush argued that it would both provide an infusion of cash to make the system solvent and give people ''the security of ownership.''But he largely skirted specifics, preferring to talk about broad principles. It was unclear, for instance, exactly how much money people could set aside for individual accounts and what sort of investment options they would have. Mr. Bush did say the investments would have to be in ''steady, reliable funds,'' adding that ''there will be no fly-by-night speculators or day trading.''He also pledged that benefits would not change for current retirees and those who are near retirement. He said he would dedicate the entire $2 trillion Social Security surplus to the retirement program. He ruled out any increase in payroll taxes, but was silent on whether to raise the retirement age.Much of the Texas Republican's address was devoted to drawing a contrast between himself and Vice President Gore, casting himself as a leader who would pave the way for a bipartisan agreement on a pressing policy matter.''I am here with a message for America and to put my opponent on notice,'' Mr. Bush said. ''The days of spreading fear and panic are over. The days of delaying, dividing, demagoguing are over. When I am elected, this generation and this president will solve Social Security.''He said that President Clinton and Mr. Gore had squandered eight years when they could have addressed the problems posed by the baby boomers. ''At a time for leadership, for long-term thinking, my opponent proposes a Band-Aid approach,'' Mr. Bush said. ''He says and I quote, 'If it ain't broke, don't fix it.' But in the lifetime of some people in this room, it will be broke and we must fix it. With every day of delay this becomes more difficult.''Mr. Gore has in large part staked his candidacy on the health of the economy and made paying down the debt the centerpiece of his economic plan. He has proposed extending the life of Social Security until 2054 by devoting the interest saved in paying down the debt to the retirement system.Mr. Gore, in his own appearance, asked what would happen to investments if economic prosperity abated. ''Today, when Wall Street is booming, I know that plan sounds appealing,'' he said. ''It probably sounds like an easy way to make more money and have more control over your retirement. But in reality, the Bush privatization plan would weaken our economy and undermine the basic guarantee of a minimum basic retirement.''Asked later about his lack of detail, Mr. Bush called his speech ''pretty darned detailed to be talking about a framework to get something done.'' His aides said he had avoided specifics because Hillary Rodham Clinton's abortive effort to craft a plan for universal health coverage had shown that being locked into one plan was a recipe for legislative disaster on a complicated issue.But the lack of specifics on matters like what percentage of payroll tax would go to accounts and what age group would see the change opened Mr. Bush to charges that he was masking some of the hard choices ahead and trying to sidestep questions about how he could afford the transition as well as his sweeping call for a $1.3 trillion tax cut in the next decade.The costs of making the transition to such a system would be significant -- as much as $1 trillion -- because the government could have to pay out full benefits to current retirees at the same time that some amount of payroll taxes were being diverted into individual accounts.Supporters of Mr. Bush and Mr. Gore feuded all day over which plan was more risky and which would entail more of a shift of general tax revenue into Social Security. Such a shift would require cuts in other programs or could lead to tax increases.The vice president asserted that Mr. Bush's plan would make it nearly impossible to pay down the national debt. ''By leaving us with a multitrillion dollar debt for as far as the eye can see, the Bush plan could trigger higher interest rates and slower long-term growth,'' Mr. Gore said. ''That undermines our chance to meet other challenges, such as keeping Medicare solvent or providing an affordable prescription drug benefit for seniors.''Mr. Gore has been lagging in recent polls and his advisers said privately they were pleased that Mr. Bush had taken on Social Security because it set up a clear policy difference between the candidates and provided a big target to shoot at, much like former Senator Bill Bradley's universal health care plan in the Democratic primaries.Indeed, Mr. Gore intends to talk about Social Security two more times this week, before younger voters at Fordham University in New York on Tuesday and before older voters in Florida on Wednesday.In the past few years an array of Republicans and Democrats have proposed Social Security overhaul plans that include an element of private accounts. But the ideas have all died because of sharp ideological differences, distrust between the parties and fear of alienating the elderly, who are a reliable voting bloc.Mr. Bush's advisers, however, believe that the politics of Social Security is changing and that their plan will appeal to younger voters who are comfortable with the market and doubt that the government will provide a secure retirement.Generally the plans would allow 2 percentage points of the 12.4 percent payroll tax to be put into individual accounts. But the programs differ quite significantly in the details.Because of the economic complexities involved, a number of them also call for benefit reductions like raising the retirement age or scaling back cost of living increases. And under one plan workers would have to return their accounts to the government when they retired and then receive a fixed monthly sum back.Today, Mr. Bush also expressed support for an approach to Medicare that had been drafted by a bipartisan commission, which would have converted Medicare into an arena for public and private competition. The approach would have given each beneficiary a fixed amount of cash to use when choosing from public and private health care plans.Mr. Bush said the elderly should be given a choice of health plans to buy, including one providing prescription drug coverage. He said Medicare itself should provide full drug coverage for the most low-income elderly.THE 2000 CAMPAIGN: THE PIVOTAL ISSUES
THE REFORM PARTYSPARKS OVER THE BALLOT IN TEXAS -- When Patrick J. Buchanan presented Texas election officials last week with twice the number of signatures required to have his name placed on the state ballot in November, some leaders of the Reform Party thought they detected a giant sucking sound, to use a favorite phrase of the party's founder, Ross Perot. Mr. Buchanan is seeking the presidential nomination of the Reform Party, but in gathering the signatures, he listed himself as an independent. Mr. Buchanan said he went the independent route in Texas because he wanted to use paid petition circulators to assure that he would get the requisite 58,000 signatures. But party officials said Mr. Buchanan's paid effort so undercut its volunteers that the party, and its numerous federal, state and local candidates, may not get on the November ballot.Ross E. Milloy (NYT)THE REPUBLICANSTHE REFORM PARTYSPARKS OVER THE BALLOT IN TEXAS -- When Patrick J. Buchanan presented Texas election officials last week with twice the number of signatures required to have his name placed on the state ballot in November, some leaders of the Reform Party thought they detected a giant sucking sound, to use a favorite phrase of the party's founder, Ross Perot. Mr. Buchanan is seeking the presidential nomination of the Reform Party, but in gathering the signatures, he listed himself as an independent. Mr. Buchanan said he went the independent route in Texas because he wanted to use paid petition circulators to assure that he would get the requisite 58,000 signatures. But party officials said Mr. Buchanan's paid effort so undercut its volunteers that the party, and its numerous federal, state and local candidates, may not get on the November ballot.Ross E. Milloy (NYT)THE REPUBLICANSCANDIDATES LOOKING TO MC CAIN -- Senator John McCain has agreed to campaign for Republican candidates in at least 35 House races, and McCain aides report that he is considering requests from at least 35 other candidates. Party leaders say Mr. McCain is in such demand because he not only draws Republicans but also lures many independents and significant numbers of wavering Democrats. During the primary season, that combination was the key to his victories in New Hampshire and Michigan and his strong performances in several other states. So what might happen if Mr. McCain made an appearance with a Democrat -- one in tune with him on his favorite issue, campaign finance reform? Might he help lure over some independents and wavering Republicans? Such questions apparently came to mind when State Representative Elaine Bloom, a Florida Democrat seeking to unseat Representative E. Clay Shaw Jr., a Republican, heard that Mr. McCain was to campaign for Mr. Shaw. She invited him to join her for a news conference on campaign finance reform. He did not.(NYT)THE DEMOCRATSTEXAS LAWYERS LOOK TO DEMOCRATIC PARTY -- The Democratic Party has received large contributions this year from trial lawyers in Texas who were awarded sizable legal fees for successfully representing the state in a $17.3 billion tobacco lawsuit. So far, the lawyers have collected $400 million of the $3.3 billion in fees that the court had authorized. Apparently feeling flush, they are giving away millions to help Democratic candidates. The Dallas Morning News reported on Sunday that since January, lawyers in five firms involved in the tobacco suit have contributed nearly $2 million in unrestricted ''soft money'' to the Democratic Party. The newspaper said the top Texas donor was the Houston law firm of John Eddie Williams, which contributed $720,000. Other big givers included the Beaumont firm of Walter Umphrey, $350,000; Harold Nix of Daingerfield, $420,000; Wayne A. Reaud of Beaumont, $250,000; and John M. O'Quinn of Houston, $100,000.Ross E. Milloy (NYT)AL GORE, THE CARTOON -- Vice President Al Gore's aides may have finally found a way to overcome complaints about his being too stiff: animation. In the May 21 season finale of the Fox sci-fi comedy, ''Futurama,'' the real Mr. Gore provides the voice for a cartoon Al Gore in an episode titled, ''Back to the Present.'' In the show, the cartoon Mr. Gore leads a team of ''Action Rangers'' who help the bumbling Futurama regular, Fry, return to the 31st Century after he gets stranded in the 21st.James Dao (NYT)AL GORE, THE FATHER AND SON -- After wrapping up a campaign speech yesterday afternoon near Philadelphia, Vice President Al Gore flew on a half-empty Air Force II to Nashville, to pick up his mother, Pauline. The two were scheduled to fly to New York City today to see Mr. Gore's daughter, Karenna, graduate from Columbia Law School. Mr. Gore's aides said the flight to Nashville was paid for by taxpayers instead of by his campaign because it involved family business.James Dao (NYT)
INTERNATIONALA3-11Worst Fighting in 4 Years Explodes in West Bank  Israeli and Palestinian forces exchanged gunfire in the West Bank as violent protests swept through Palestinian enclaves. Despite the fighting, Prime Minister Ehud Barak won approval from Parliament to cede three villages to the Palestinian Authority, which was originally intended by Mr. Barak as a gesture of good will to advance the peace talks.A1Ethiopia-Eritrea Border War  Eritrea said it had shot down two Ethiopian aircraft and inflicted heavy casualties in intense fighting. Ethiopia conceded that a helicopter had been downed but denied that it had also lost a fighter.A6INTERNATIONALA3-11Worst Fighting in 4 Years Explodes in West Bank  Israeli and Palestinian forces exchanged gunfire in the West Bank as violent protests swept through Palestinian enclaves. Despite the fighting, Prime Minister Ehud Barak won approval from Parliament to cede three villages to the Palestinian Authority, which was originally intended by Mr. Barak as a gesture of good will to advance the peace talks.A1Ethiopia-Eritrea Border War  Eritrea said it had shot down two Ethiopian aircraft and inflicted heavy casualties in intense fighting. Ethiopia conceded that a helicopter had been downed but denied that it had also lost a fighter.A6The United States asked the Security Council to impose sanctions on Ethiopia and Eritrea until the border fighting stopped. The resolution would prohibit the sale or delivery of weapons and military equipment to either side, and would bar senior Ethiopian officials from international travel. But the proposal has met resistance on the Security Council.A6Leaning Toward China Bill  Representative Charles B. Rangel, an influential senior House Democrat from New York, signaled that he was leaning in favor of the China trade bill. Heavy lobbying is expected to lead up to next week's scheduled vote.A12Assessing Kosovo Prospects  The General Accounting Office said prospects for lasting peace in Kosovo, Bosnia and other parts of the Balkans remained bleak, and it warned of the prospect of instability and even renewed violence. The report was issued on the eve of a Senate vote to set a deadline for withdrawing American troops.A4Defending Massacre Report  The Associated Press presented detailed evidence to rebut critics of its Pulitzer Prize-winning news report that said American soldiers, acting under orders, killed hundreds of South Korean civilians in the early days of the Korean War.A12Hostage Incident in Norway  A man armed with a shotgun and bitter at losing custody of his children held up to 35 children and adults hostage for about 11 hours in a kindergarten in Hjelmeland, in western Norway. He surrendered.(Reuters)World BriefingA8NATIONALA14-20Court Voids Key Provision Of Law to Protect Women  The Supreme Court, ruling 5 to 4, invalidated a provision of the six-year-old Violence Against Women Act that had let victims of rape, domestic violence and other crimes ''motivated by gender'' sue their attackers in federal court. A provision making it a federal crime to cross state lines to commit an act of domestic violence or stalking is not affected.A1Bush Stakes Out Early Lead  Gov. George W. Bush has emerged at this early stage as the preferred candidate across the demographic spectrum, a New York Times/CBS News Poll found, with Americans preferring him personally to Vice President Al Gore, though Mr. Gore's issue positions are more appealing.A1Governor Bush proposed letting workers choose how to invest some of their Social Security taxes.A1New Coalition on Immigration  Jack Kemp, left, a former Republican vice presidential candidate, and Henry G. Cisneros, a former housing secretary, will head a coalition of conservatives and liberals seeking an easing of immigration laws.A16A panel of scientists and engineers who advise the government expressed concern that heightened security measures at federal laboratories appeared to be damaging the ability to hire and retain foreign-born and minority scientists.A16A Plan to Bomb the Moon  Air Force scientists worked on a cold-war plan to detonate a nuclear bomb on the moon as a show of strength, a physicist said.A17Indian Sites Imperiled by Fire  The Los Alamos wildfire threatened ancient Indian dwellings and lands in New Mexico that contain invaluable archaeological sites.A14Report on Columbine Rampage  The 13 people shot to death at Columbine High School were all assaulted within the first 16 minutes as the authorities were assessing the situation outside, a sheriff's report said.A14Wire Service Is Sold  U.P.I., which has struggled for years with red ink and a succession of owners, has been bought by the affiliate of the Unification Church that publishes The Washington Times.A19NEW YORK/REGIONB1-9Mayor Leaning Toward Run; G.O.P. Wants Final Answer  Mayor Giuliani raised money for his Senate campaign at an evening event, saying, ''I'm very much inclined to do this.'' Earlier, he continued to say he had not yet decided whether to run. Republicans reacted with growing exasperation.B1Tough Reply to Rights Panel  The New York Police Department says in response to a draft report by the United States Civil Rights Commission that the panel's research was slipshod and its conclusion that the police engage in racial profiling was recklessly unfair.B1Some Gaps in Picket Line  The Museum of Modern Art said 40 percent of the 250 workers in the union had returned to work in the 18-day strike. The union president said the strike was still going strong.B4SCIENCE TIMESF1-12Giving the Space Station a Lift  The International Space Station, under construction about 200 miles up, is losing altitude every day. The shuttle Atlantis, set to be launched on Thursday, will try to nudge it up 20 miles or so to ensure it does not fall to Earth before it is completed.F1Hooked on Online Sex  A new psychological disorder -- cybersex addiction -- appears to be rapidly spreading and roiling the lives of those affected.F7Clot-Busting Drugs Questioned  Three studies challenge the safety and benefits of clot-busting drugs for older people suffering heart attacks, particularly those 75 and older.F8Health & FitnessF8LIVING ARTSE1-10SPORTSD1-8Bob Knight's Punishment  The Indiana basketball coach was suspended for three games next season and fined $30,000 for what a university inquiry concluded was his ''pattern of inappropriate behavior.''D1BUSINESS DAYC1-32A Multinational Online Deal  Lycos, one of the nation's biggest Internet portals, was said to have agreed to be acquired by the Net arm of Telefonica of Spain in a deal that would also involve Bertelsmann and be worth more than $12 billion.C1Stocks Up on Eve of Fed Meeting  The Dow rose 198.41 points, or 1.9 percent, to 10,807.78; the Nasdaq climbed 78.59, or 2.2 percent, to 3,607.65; and the S.& P. 500 jumped 31.40, or 2.2 percent, to 1,452.36. The Fed is expected to raise rates by half a percentage point today.C1Interest rose in Nabisco Holdings and its parent, the Nabisco Group.C1Business DigestC1FASHIONB10OBITUARIESA21Rodman C. Rockefeller  The oldest son of Nelson A. Rockefeller was 68. He was active in efforts that led to Nafta.A21EDITORIALA22-23Editorials: Violence against the Constitution; closing the achievement gap; ruinous war in the Horn of Africa; a coach beyond punishment.Columns: Thomas L. Friedman.CrosswordE4TV ListingsE9Public LivesB2WeatherD8
While many Americans find Vice President Al Gore's stands on issues more appealing, he is not as well liked or considered as commanding a leader as Gov. George W. Bush, the latest New York Times/CBS News Poll shows.Mr. Gore's lackluster personal favorability ratings may help explain why Mr. Bush has emerged at this early stage as the preferred candidate across the demographic spectrum, including three critical groups that voted Democratic in 1996: Catholics, independents and Northeasterners. Voters polled, in fact, are so lukewarm toward Mr. Gore that he is widely perceived as a loser in November: by a ratio of nearly 2 to 1, they expect Mr. Bush to capture the White House.While many Americans find Vice President Al Gore's stands on issues more appealing, he is not as well liked or considered as commanding a leader as Gov. George W. Bush, the latest New York Times/CBS News Poll shows.Mr. Gore's lackluster personal favorability ratings may help explain why Mr. Bush has emerged at this early stage as the preferred candidate across the demographic spectrum, including three critical groups that voted Democratic in 1996: Catholics, independents and Northeasterners. Voters polled, in fact, are so lukewarm toward Mr. Gore that he is widely perceived as a loser in November: by a ratio of nearly 2 to 1, they expect Mr. Bush to capture the White House.Despite Mr. Bush's advantages six months before Election Day, Mr. Gore may be heartened that vice presidents are often overshadowed by the presidents they serve until they can distinguish themselves on a national stage at their nominating convention. In fact, at this time 12 years ago, Mr. Bush's father, then the vice president, trailed Michael S. Dukakis by 10 points, but went on to a lopsided victory in November.And the survey illuminated potential rough patches for the Texas governor. For one thing, voters polled had qualms with his plan, which he outlined yesterday, that would allow workers to invest part of their payroll taxes in private accounts. Most of those polled said the stock market was a perilous place to invest.Voters also seemed skeptical of Mr. Bush's proposed tax cut of $483 billion over five years -- a measure that Mr. Gore has condemned as a ''risky tax scheme.'' Even 57 percent of people who said they planned to vote for Mr. Bush were uncertain of the effect of that proposal.Mr. Bush will also have to cautiously navigate roiling factions in his own ranks. Three of every 10 Republican voters polled said that if the governor picks a running mate who supports legalized abortion they would be less likely to support him. About a third of all voters said religious conservatives carry too much influence in the Republican Party.The nationwide telephone survey was conducted last Wednesday through Saturday with 947 adults, including 716 registered voters. The margin of sampling error was plus or minus 3 to 4 percentage points.Perhaps the most promising news for Mr. Gore was that he scored well with voters on issues they said were at the top of their agenda, like health care, education and Social Security. He was also seen as more caring than Mr. Bush, despite the governor's slogan that he is a ''compassionate conservative.''Given that his issues are popular and that the economy seems hearty, the nagging difficulty that has confounded the vice president's advisers and many Democrats is why his overall ratings are not more competitive with Mr. Bush.Among all voters, Mr. Bush led Mr. Gore by 8 percentage points, 47 to 39. Mr. Bush held a wide advantage among men, 50 to 36 percentage points; among women, Mr. Gore drew 42 percent, Mr. Bush, 44 percent.The vice president's lagging ratings appear to have more to do with personality than policy. Mr. Gore was seen favorably by 34 percent of registered voters and unfavorably by 36 percent. By contrast, Mr. Bush was seen favorably by 40 percent and unfavorably by 28 percent.A related problem that has dogged Mr. Gore is that Mr. Bush is viewed as more of a leader. Fifty-three percent of registered voters in the new poll said Mr. Gore had strong leadership qualities; 63 percent said the same thing about Mr. Bush.The contrast is striking, particularly since Mr. Gore has been an elected official since 1976, when he was elected to the House from Tennessee; Mr. Bush was elected governor, his first office, in 1994. That said, Mr. Gore has spent the past seven years in the shadow of a president who consistently draws high ratings for the job he has done in office.Several people who responded to the poll explained in follow-up interviews that there were not specific issues on which they split sharply with Mr. Gore. Rather, they often cited more intangible personal factors.''Gore has not really shown a lot of leadership qualities or abilities to be in a position to run our nation,'' said Ken Bogler, 27, a labor representative from Somerset, N.J., who is an independent. ''It's a presence, really. The way he carries himself, the way he speaks, does not seem presidential.''He added, ''Issues don't play a big part in my support. Nine times out of 10, the candidates change their positions once they get into office any way. He may have the experience, but if you don't have the confidence and the abilities of someone who can handle the job, you don't give him the job.''Vera Jeane, 71, a retired nurse from Bay City, Tex., who is a Democrat, put it this way: ''Al Gore acts as if he's not sure what he's thinking, as if he doesn't have a mind of his own. He doesn't seem to be strong enough in his opinions and as a leader to be president. Bush seems to be a stronger man with more definitive opinions. And I think he would make a better leader.''Tony Coelho, Mr. Gore's campaign chairman, said he was not discouraged by such critiques and insisted that voters would defect from Mr. Bush when his policy stands are articulated in detail.''You take the issues that are out there today,'' he said. ''As we get to the general election, we're going to be forcing a debate.''Citing how Mr. Gore has inched up in the polls since last year, Mr. Coelho added: ''We've made up a lot of points with George Bush. I'm not worried about George Bush at this point.''With fewer than 3 in 10 voters saying they were paying a lot of attention to the campaign, the candidates have not yet been able to fully define themselves to the electorate.Mr. Bush, in particular, has made little headway in trumpeting his programs for cutting taxes and overhauling the Social Security system. Only 9 percent of registered voters in the poll said they knew a great deal about Mr. Bush's tax blueprint; 58 percent said they had no idea whether his plan would help or hurt the economy.By a ratio of 4 to 1, those polled preferred using any budget surplus to shore up Social Security rather than to cut income taxes -- even as a majority said it might be possible to do both.In a finding that raises questions about the Social Security proposal Mr. Bush discussed yesterday, those polled were closely divided over whether individuals should be allowed to invest portions of their Social Security taxes on their own.When asked to put aside their presidential preferences and focus on issues, Mr. Gore was considered more capable in tackling Social Security and education, traditional Democratic strengths.But the candidates were viewed about evenly in handling gun control, which has long been viewed as a Democratic issue, and taxes.Voters also identified stark ideological differences between the candidates. For all the efforts by Mr. Bush and Mr. Gore to court moderates, voters did not see them as moderates.Forty-three percent of registered voters said they thought of Mr. Bush as a conservative while 34 percent said they thought he was a moderate. Similarly, 43 percent cast Mr. Gore as a liberal, while 30 percent said he was more a moderate.Mr. Bush has been unable to shake the idea advanced by gun control advocates that the National Rifle Association would wield considerable influence in a Bush administration. Voters were three times more likely to say that Mr. Bush would be influenced greatly by the N.R.A. than Mr. Gore would.In the follow-up interviews, some voters, citing character considerations, lamented that Senator John McCain, who was defeated by Mr. Bush in the Republican primaries, would not be on any ticket. In fact, Mr. McCain has maintained far more impressive favorability ratings than Mr. Bush or Mr. Gore: 46 percent have a favorable view of him; 14 percent hold an unfavorable view.''I don't see in Gore or Bush that clear definitive leadership quality that McCain had,'' said Tim Olkar, 22, a student in Wheaton, Ill., who is an independent.Speaking of Mr. Gore, he said: ''He seems kind of wishy-washy as a candidate and seems to be running a negative campaign. Bush seems a little more genuine to me.''Beyond the candidates themselves, the Democratic and Republican parties are now seen more favorably than less so by voters. The Republican Party, in particular, has rebounded to its standing before the impeachment proceedings against President Clinton, which took a toll on the party.There was no upswing for the Reform Party, which seems poised to nominate Patrick J. Buchanan as its standard bearer. The party is seen twice as negatively as positively.''How the Poll Was Conducted''The latest New York Times/CBS News Poll is based on telephone interviews conducted Wednesday through Saturday with 947 adults throughout the United States. Of these, 716 said they were registered to vote.The telephone exchanges called were randomly selected by a computer from a complete list of more than 42,000 active residential exchanges in the United States.Within each exchange, random digits were added to form a complete telephone number, permitting access to both listed and unlisted numbers. Within each household, one adult was designated by a random procedure to be the respondent for the survey.The results have been weighted to account for household size and the number of telephone lines in the residence, and to adjust for variations in the sample relating to geographic region, sex, race, age and education.In theory, in 19 cases out of 20, the results based on such samples will differ by no more than four percentage points in either direction from what would have been obtained by talking to all registered voter in the United States.For smaller subgroups, the margin of sampling error is larger.In addition to sampling error, the practical difficulties of conducting any survey of public opinion may introduce other sources of error. Variations in the wording and order of questions, for example, may lead to somewhat different results.THE 2000 CAMPAIGN: PUBLIC OPINION
To the Editor:Re ''Mothers Rally to Assail Gun Violence'' (front page, May 15): I attended the Million Mom March in Washington. I had not planned to, and I knew no one who was going, but the day before I surfed the Web and noticed there were eight buses leaving from a local shopping center at 6 a.m. All seats were reserved, but I went stand-by. The first bus was full;  the second had one no-show.To the Editor:Re ''Mothers Rally to Assail Gun Violence'' (front page, May 15): I attended the Million Mom March in Washington. I had not planned to, and I knew no one who was going, but the day before I surfed the Web and noticed there were eight buses leaving from a local shopping center at 6 a.m. All seats were reserved, but I went stand-by. The first bus was full;  the second had one no-show.I am a registered Republican who votes by issues, and my presence at the march was not intended as a political statement. It was a moral stance. To the National Rifle Association, I say, along with the other marchers, ''Enough is enough.''I intend to write my representative and senators in support of child-safety locks, the registration of all handguns and the licensing of all handgun owners. Which candidate,  George W. Bush or Al Gore, will be the first to support sensible gun laws? That candidate will earn my vote.LAUREL HARVEY  Princeton, N.J., May 15, 2000
The debate over Social Security reform is not exactly noted for witty repartee. But one much-repeated joke says that the pace of reform will determine the future of stock prices: the big crash will come only once a few trillion dollars of the retirement fund have been put into the market.Gallows humor aside, it's a real issue. Historically, investors who bought stocks have earned much higher returns than the Social Security Administration, which buys only government bonds. Inevitably, then, many would-be saviors of Social Security believe that stocks are the answer to the system's problems. But if you use conventional ideas about valuation, today's stock prices look very high. So would investing in stocks now be a classic case of bad timing?The debate over Social Security reform is not exactly noted for witty repartee. But one much-repeated joke says that the pace of reform will determine the future of stock prices: the big crash will come only once a few trillion dollars of the retirement fund have been put into the market.Gallows humor aside, it's a real issue. Historically, investors who bought stocks have earned much higher returns than the Social Security Administration, which buys only government bonds. Inevitably, then, many would-be saviors of Social Security believe that stocks are the answer to the system's problems. But if you use conventional ideas about valuation, today's stock prices look very high. So would investing in stocks now be a classic case of bad timing?This question has suddenly become much more relevant, now that George W. Bush has announced his Social Security plan. He doesn't want the trust fund itself to buy stocks. But he does want to let workers put some of their contributions into individual retirement accounts, which could be invested in stocks. And he justifies this proposal by pointing to the high returns that stock market investors have historically earned, and comparing these returns with the ''dismal'' returns of the Social Security Administration. The higher returns people can get by investing in stocks will, he argues, let him scale back guaranteed benefits without reducing actual retirement income.If you think that stocks are currently overpriced, this proposal sounds like a recipe for disaster: it will encourage workers to buy stocks at exactly the wrong time -- eventually leading to an even worse Social Security crisis, as the government finds itself under intense pressure to bail out the baby boomers.But optimists counter that even though stocks look overpriced by conventional measures -- the price-earnings ratio of the average S.&P. 500 stock is more than twice as high as the historical average -- those conventional measures are misleading. The sensible argument on behalf of current stock valuations is that historically stocks have been underpriced, because investors have been far too cautious.Economists who make this argument point to the same statistics cited by Mr. Bush: the fact that stocks have consistently yielded a much higher rate of return than bonds. Why this ''equity premium'' persisted so long remains a puzzle: why didn't investors long ago rush into stocks, driving their prices up and their rate of return down? But anyway, the puzzle is now history: in the 1990's investors did rush into stocks. What the optimists believe is that this rush corrected an error rather than creating one, that the rise of the stock market in recent years reflects not the rise of irrational exuberance but the decline of irrational risk aversion.I have my doubts about this story. But suppose that it is right, and that current stock valuations are in fact reasonable. Does this then validate Mr. Bush's plan? Alas, no. You see, those high returns cited by Mr. Bush -- the returns that are supposed to produce huge gains for workers free to make their own investment decisions -- are what stock investors got during an era in which people were very leery of stocks, and hence prices were low compared with earnings. Now that people are no longer so nervous, prices are much higher compared with earnings -- and the higher the price you pay for an asset, the lower the rate of return on your investment. (Duh.) So the rate of return on stock investments made now will probably be much lower than the returns people got in the past. (Remember, this is the optimistic scenario, which claims that current values are reasonable -- if they aren't, the return will be even lower.) And that means that the proposition that individual investors can expect to do a lot better than the Social Security Administration -- so much better that we can wave away concerns about increased risk -- evaporates.So Mr. Bush can defend himself against the charge of bad timing by arguing that stocks are not overvalued, that their high prices are justified because people no longer demand traditionally high rates of return. But how can he then assume that people will nonetheless get those traditional high returns -- and use that assumption as the basis for a huge policy initiative?I just don't get it. But then, I'm not running for president.
Helen Thomas, a White House reporter since John F. Kennedy was president, abruptly resigned from United Press International today, one day after the news service was acquired.Arnaud de Borchgrave, the news service's president and chief executive officer, announced Ms. Thomas's departure ''with great regret and sadness.''Helen Thomas, a White House reporter since John F. Kennedy was president, abruptly resigned from United Press International today, one day after the news service was acquired.Arnaud de Borchgrave, the news service's president and chief executive officer, announced Ms. Thomas's departure ''with great regret and sadness.''Ms. Thomas broke into journalism in 1943 as a radio writer for the news service. She had enough energy and persistence to overcome a male-dominated journalism field in which women were consigned to write society news while men went after the ''real'' stories and bragged of their exploits later over cigars and whiskey.One of nine children of Lebanese-born immigrants, Helen Thomas started working for United Press a year after graduating from what is now Wayne State University in Detroit. She began covering federal agencies in Washington in the 1950's, and in November 1960 she was assigned to cover President-elect John F. Kennedy.She was given the White House beat in 1961 and has been there since, becoming the unofficial dean of White House reporters. She has often been seen asking the first question at presidential news conferences and ending the sessions by saying, ''Thank you, Mr. President.''Ms. Thomas has traveled around the world with Presidents Richard M. Nixon, Gerald R. Ford, Jimmy Carter, Ronald Reagan, George Bush and Bill Clinton. She became famous for occasionally annoying, and now and then amusing, the chief executives with her questions.''Presidents come and go,'' President Clinton said today. ''But Helen's been here for 40 years now.''Ms. Thomas, 79, said in a statement released by U.P.I.: ''I do not intend to stay. United Press International is a great news agency. It has made a remarkable mark in the annals of American journalism and has left a superb legacy for future journalists. I wish the new owners all the best, great stories and happy landings.''Ms. Thomas's statement said nothing about U.P.I.'s acquisition by News World Communications Inc., which was founded by the Rev. Sun Myung Moon, leader of the Unification Church. News World Communications publishes The Washington Times, a favorite of conservative readers in Washington.Both Mr. de Borchgrave and News World Communications said U.P.I. would continue to have editorial independence under the new ownership. U.P.I. said Ms. Thomas planned to pursue new ventures. Ms. Thomas could not be reached for comment.But Lee Michael Katz, who quit today as U.P.I.'s international editor, said he was not surprised by Ms. Thomas's departure and had no doubt about the reasons. ''Look at the timing of this, and Helen's devotion,'' Mr. Katz said.Mr. Katz called his own decision to resign ''a no-brainer'' and said, ''I cannot work for the new owners.''United Press merged with the International News Service to form United Press International in 1958. In its prime, U.P.I. competed fiercely with The Associated Press and other major news organizations, but in recent years it has been hobbled by dwindling profits and frequent management changes.United Press International has closed many of its far-flung bureaus. As of Monday, it had 157 employees, Mr. de Borchgrave said. He added that no layoffs were contemplated. As for Ms. Thomas, he said her name was ''indelibly engraved in the history of our profession.''With Ms. Thomas's departure, it is not immediately clear who supplants her as the senior White House reporter, said Susan Page of U.S.A. Today, president of the White House Correspondents Association.Not long ago, Ms. Thomas helped Mr. Clinton poke fun at his lame-duck status. In a self-spoofing video he made, Mr. Clinton holds forth in the White House briefing room and asks if there are any questions.The camera then focuses on the only reporter present, a sleeping Helen Thomas. Snapping awake, she asks, ''Are you still here?''
Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, the presumptive Republican presidential nominee, today sharply criticized a bill backed by Senate Republicans that would set a deadline for withdrawing American ground troops from Kosovo. Mr. Bush called the bill a ''legislative overreach'' that would tie his hands if he becomes president.But the Senate majority leader, Trent Lott of Mississippi, along with the bill's chief Republican sponsor, John W. Warner of Virginia, said they would push ahead with the measure. That sets up the first major foreign policy clash between Mr. Bush and congressional Republicans.Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, the presumptive Republican presidential nominee, today sharply criticized a bill backed by Senate Republicans that would set a deadline for withdrawing American ground troops from Kosovo. Mr. Bush called the bill a ''legislative overreach'' that would tie his hands if he becomes president.But the Senate majority leader, Trent Lott of Mississippi, along with the bill's chief Republican sponsor, John W. Warner of Virginia, said they would push ahead with the measure. That sets up the first major foreign policy clash between Mr. Bush and congressional Republicans.Until today, momentum seemed to be building among most Senate Republicans for the measure, which would cut off funds for the 5,900 United States forces in Kosovo by July 1, 2001, forcing their withdrawal, unless Congress authorizes an extension. Many Republicans said they assumed that Mr. Bush endorsed the measure, which may be voted on as early as Wednesday.But last weekend, opponents of the measure, including at least five Republican senators, warned Mr. Bush's top aides of the potential conflict. In response, the Bush campaign issued its statement.''The Clinton-Gore administration has failed to instill trust in Congress and the American people when it comes to our military and deployment of troops overseas, but the governor does not believe this provision is the way to resolve the lack of presidential leadership,'' Scott McClellan, a spokesman for Mr. Bush, said. ''Governor Bush views it as a legislative overreach on powers of the presidency.''Top aides to President Clinton have recommended that he veto an $8.6 billion military construction bill if the Senate language is attached.  The bill includes $4.7 billion for American military operations in Kosovo, anti-drug efforts in Colombia and other defense spending.Defense Secretary William S. Cohen warned today that passage of the measure would send a dangerous signal. ''If the United States were to mandate an artificial deadline for our departure, then I suspect that other members of NATO will do the same,'' he said. And that would lead to ''the return to the kind of conflict we witnessed last year.''After Mr. Bush's views were made known today, splits quickly formed in the party line, and Republicans were casting about tonight to figure a graceful way out of the showdown.''I agree with the governor,'' said Senator Thad Cochran, a Mississippi Republican. ''He would need the flexibility of a newly elected president to make decisions with his own advisers.''Senator Chuck Hagel, a Nebraska Republican, said, ''We're putting that new president in a very difficult position, with no flexibility and no latitude on a very, very complicated issue in the Balkans.''Such opposition would likely kill the proposal, said Senator Ted Stevens, an Alaska Republican who heads the Appropriations Committee, and who supports the measure.But Mr. Lott said he still supported the measure. Mr. Warner agreed, but said the floor vote would be close.''Presidents are very protective of their prerogative, but what I'd say to him is that Congress has its own prerogative and it's the power of the purse,'' Mr. Warner said in an interview. Senator Kay Bailey Hutchison, a Texas Republican, said she would recommend pushing back the deadline to give the next president more time to work with the Congress.
Why can't people see it?I am Maximus.Why can't people see it?I am Maximus.He is Commodus.I am the handsome gladiator who has proved himself in the arena.He is the beady-eyed loser son of the emperor.But when will the crowds start screaming my name?Al-bert-us! Al-bert-us! Al-bert-us!Tipper's the only one who ever screams my name.I feel like I'm trapped in some Bizarro universe where all the roles are reversed. People think I'm dumb and sniveling and he's experienced and commanding.Give . . . me . . . a . . . break.A new poll in The New York Times says Americans think Bush is a better leader than I am. I'm losing in all my key demos -- Northeasterners, Catholics, independents. Women don't like me. Men really don't like me.The Times ran a headline the other day, ''Women Appear Unmoved by Gore.'' How embarrassing is that? One woman they interviewed called me a ''jerk.'' Another called me ''a snake in the grass'' with ''a big smirk.''I don't smirk. He smirks.Some other woman said she didn't think I was ''smart enough'' to be president.I'm not smart enough?Puh-leese.I'm running against a guy who refers to ''tariffs and barriers'' as ''terriers and bariffs.'' He calls ''handcuffs'' ''cuff links.''How could you trust Bush to be in charge of ''tactical nuclear weapons'' when he can't even pronounce it? ''Unleash the tacular weapons, general!'' How could President Bush Jr. even call for a ''missile launch'' when he calls it a ''mental loss.'' Mental loss is right.Women think I'm not smart because I talk slow-ly and de-lib-er-ate-ly.Don't they understand that I talk slow-ly and de-lib-er-ate-ly to give them a chance to catch up?Maybe nice guys do finish last.The polls show I'm doing worse with married women than either Bill or Rudy. And I actually like my wife.Do women prefer bad boys? Is that what this is all about? Fine. I can be a bad boy. I can do a bad, bad thing.Note to self: Drop the earth tones. Buy a black leather jacket.Men don't like me because I'm always trying to be perfect. They don't trust me. They don't want to be in a foxhole with me. They think I'd turn them in. Like that stupid Leno joke about how I'm the annoying kid in school who reminds the teacher, ''You forgot to give us homework!''I know what people want in a president. They want a good guy. Not some stiff like Michael Dukakis reading books about Swedish crop rotation.I've tried hard to be a guy. I started lifting weights. I got different clothes.But everybody in the Texas Legislature blathers about what a great guy Bush is. And everybody who was in the Senate with me complains I was a loner and a showboat.Behind the scenes at the White House, I was the one trying to stiffen Bill's backbone on the budget, gays in the military, Bosnia.Now people think I have no backbone.I pay top dollar to Coelho and Shrum and their big advice for me is to pander on Elian? I know how to pander. I know how to flip-flop. Like I need to pay people to teach me how to do that?The polls say voters like my issues. They just don't like me.It must be the Clinton curse. Everyone who gets anywhere near that couple gets snakebit.I just seem to get it coming and going. People blame me for Bill's  sleaziness at the same time they blame me for not having Bill's charm.People say they want a fighter, but when I attack Bush as Risky Man, they think I'm mean and desperate.Bush gets all the breaks. First he gets McCain to meet with him. Now he's planning a powwow with Colin Powell.He has even put Bob Jones behind him, and persuaded Americans he's the candidate of the middle. That's my real estate!Sheesh.Oh, well. I'm always at my best when my back's against the wall.Bring on the tigers!In this life or the next, Commodus, I will have my vengeance.
With access to millions of acres of public lands in the balance, a lobbying battle unfolding around the country is being portrayed by powerful groups on both sides as critical to the shape of America's outdoor future.At stake is the fate of vast tracts of national forest that the Clinton administration, in its last months in office, is rushing to put permanently off limits to road building. More than any other issue in recent years, the proposal has stirred environmental organizations and their opponents into political action, in a fresh test of the muscle that each side can wield.With access to millions of acres of public lands in the balance, a lobbying battle unfolding around the country is being portrayed by powerful groups on both sides as critical to the shape of America's outdoor future.At stake is the fate of vast tracts of national forest that the Clinton administration, in its last months in office, is rushing to put permanently off limits to road building. More than any other issue in recent years, the proposal has stirred environmental organizations and their opponents into political action, in a fresh test of the muscle that each side can wield.Much of the battle will be played out in high school cafeterias and community centers in places like Orofino, Idaho, and Flagstaff, Ariz., where the first of more than 300 public meetings the Forest Service is organizing were held yesterday to solicit public reaction to a draft plan for the roadless areas.But already the fight has begun to spill out in advertisements, on Web sites and in mass mailings from organizations like the Wilderness Society and the Blue Ribbon Coalition, a group of off-road vehicle advocates, all of which say they have placed the issue at the top of their agendas.''Clearly, there's a race going on to capture the grass roots and to influence the debate,'' said Josh Kardon, chief of staff to Senator Ron Wyden, an Oregon Democrat whose state is shaping up as an important battleground.The draft plan, made public by the Forest Service last week, would bar road construction across nearly a quarter of the national forest lands, or 2 percent of the nation's land mass. In their own way, the arguments being sounded for and against the plan are equally broad in scope.A television advertisement being broadcast by the Heritage Forests Campaign depicts ghostly images of wilderness despoiled by logging, and warns, in reference to the forests: ''Once they're gone, they're gone forever.'' By contrast, the timber industry, which would lose access to some logging under the plan, has conjured up its own Armageddon, by pointing to the fires in Los Alamos, N.M., to warn that the same may occur elsewhere if a broad ban on road building is put in place.''Basically, you're condemning the areas that have no roads to just these kinds of holocausts in the future,'' said W. Henson Moore, a former congressman from Louisiana who is head of the American Forest and Paper Association.Edward Moreland, Washington representative for the American Motorcyclist Association, said, ''This to us is the single largest threat in many, many years to continued access to public land, and we're taking the threat very seriously.''The bitterness of the debate reflects deep differences about the proper role of the national forests, but it also seems to reflect a shared view that the issue can push the right hot buttons at a time of general softening in the environmental debate.''On both sides, these groups want to build their membership base, and in an election year, this is the kind of mobilizing that can also spill over into the political process,'' said Mark Rey, a former timber industry official who is now staff director of the Senate subcommittee that oversees forestry issues.The draft plan was developed at President Clinton's directive and would prohibit road building across 43 million acres of national forest, comprising most of the land that has never been developed but has never explicitly been set aside as a wilderness area.Mr. Clinton vowed last year to ''protect all of this before it's too late,'' but most leading environmental groups argue that the plan should go further, by banning logging as well as roads, and by addressing Alaska's Tongass National Forest, the nation's largest.But in articulating a rival view, most off-road vehicle advocates and timber industry officials have been arguing that too much public land has already been placed off limits to public use, and the roadless approach would deal a final, fatal blow to that principle.That the battle over roadless areas will next play out in the public meetings follows from a decision by the administration to bypass Congress, and try to impose the ban through administrative powers.The approach is an effort to skirt opposition from powerful Western lawmakers like Senator Larry E. Craig of Idaho, but by law, it also requires a prolonged period of public comment, and the administration is going to great lengths to shield itself from complaints that it was unwilling to hear out the plan's foes.The series of public meetings now planned over the next 60 days is by far the most extensive such review ever held for a proposed change in federal rules, said Chris Wood, senior policy adviser to the chief of the Forest Service.About 200 meetings were held last winter, and, having already reviewed about 500,000 letters and postcards on the issue, the Forest Service is now preparing to sift through as many as one million more, many of which have already been generated through forms posted on various organization's Web sites.''We're going above and beyond, and some people say excessively so, in order to make sure that people have a full opportunity to comment,'' said Mr. Wood. A Forest Service official said the cost of the review would exceed $10 million.This round of meetings, to be held through June 2, is intended to allow the Forest Service to present its plan, so any real fireworks are not likely to emerge until another round, which begins in mid-June.The White House has made clear that its intention is to see the new rules issued well before Mr. Clinton leaves office in January, to cement what presidential aides have called an important part of his legacy.Though Vice President Al Gore has been an enthusiastic advocate of wider roadless areas, his Republican opponent, Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, has not. And Mr. Bush has said that he would address such issues through close consultation with state and local officials, who in Idaho and other states have been battling the administration's plans.That backdrop has added a sharply partisan tone to some of the lobbying now under way, with some environmentalists warning that Mr. Bush would attempt to reverse any roadless policy the administration puts in place while some critics of the plan say they doubt they will receive a fair hearing.''Nobody has any illusions about whether or not their comments will be seriously considered by the Forest Service under this administration's leadership,'' said Stefany Bayles of the Intermountain Forest Association in Pocatello, Idaho, a timber organization that has filed suit to challenge the rule-making process.In planning their lobbying, officials of organizations most actively involved in the fight say they are working more closely than ever before to coordinate what in the past have been fragmented efforts.For example, the leaders from the Sierra Club, the Wilderness Society and other major environmental groups have been consulting by conference call at least once a week to hone an advocacy campaign that Ken Rait, director of the Heritage Forests Campaign, said will ultimately include more than $4 million in spending. Much of that was provided to Mr. Rait's group in a grant from the Pew Charitable Trusts.Among major opponents of roadless efforts, timber industry officials and off-road vehicle advocates say their budgets will be far smaller, but they would not disclose how much they plan to spend. Along with its lobbying efforts, the timber industry's role as a major campaign donor has long magnified its political clout.Still, as in any public debate, at least some of the noise over the roadless issue is clearly intended in part for narrow ends. All of the groups using the Internet to mobilize their followers also use the sites to enlist contributions and new members.''These sorts of threats make it easier to convince folks that they need to team up with others in an organization like ours,'' said Clark Collins, executive director of the Blue Ribbon Coalition, which says it represents about 600,000 off-road vehicle advocates and other public land users.
When E. F. Hutton talks, Al Gore doesn't listen.The vice president does not invest in the stock market. He told reporters yesterday that he had shied away from the market for nearly 25 years because he was worried that as a public official, any investments might look like a conflict of interest.When E. F. Hutton talks, Al Gore doesn't listen.The vice president does not invest in the stock market. He told reporters yesterday that he had shied away from the market for nearly 25 years because he was worried that as a public official, any investments might look like a conflict of interest.''Twenty-four years ago, when I ran for Congress, for good or ill, I made the decision that in order to avoid even the appearance of any conflict of interest, on the many subjects that would come up for votes, I decided as a matter of personal policy I would not invest in stocks,'' Mr. Gore told reporters yesterday at a news conference in New York.''Now, missing the bull market is not the greatest thing in the world, financially,'' he said a little sheepishly. ''But for me, it was the right decision.''The issue came up after Gov. George W. Bush asserted that Mr. Gore had a ''substantial amount of his money invested in the stock market.'' Mr. Bush made the statement Monday in promoting his plan to allow people to invest some of their Social Security payroll taxes in the market. Mr. Bush may have thought it was a safe assumption, given that half of all American households are invested in the market.Financial experts suggested they would have made the same assumption. David G. Dietze, president of Point View Financial Services, an investment advisory firm in Summit, N.J., said it was highly unusual for someone of Mr. Gore's age (52) and income ($171,500 a year) not to be invested. ''There's probably only one chance in 100 that someone of his ilk would not have investments in the stock market,'' Mr. Dietze said.A 1998 examination of Mr. Gore's finances by Fortune Magazine concluded that Mr. Gore's assets were dwindling and questioned how he could hope to run the United States economy as president with such a dismal track record with his own finances. Fortune said Mr. Gore had a small amount of money in I.R.A.'s, but that most of his money was in checking and passbook accounts or tied up in property.''This potential president could be a financial dolt,'' Fortune wrote, noting that in addition to his salary, the vice president had earned more than $1 million from his book ''Earth in the Balance.''''This is a family in dire need of a money manager,'' the magazine wrote.THE 2000 CAMPAIGN: THE PERSONAL FINANCES
A Near-Carbuncle, Not 'Just a Lump'PEGGY NOONAN, who was a speechwriter for Presidents George Bush and Ronald Reagan, quoted Charles, the Prince of Wales, and the actor KEVIN KLINE quoted Shakespeare as they joined the chorus opposing an apartment building planned for the Upper East Side.A Near-Carbuncle, Not 'Just a Lump'PEGGY NOONAN, who was a speechwriter for Presidents George Bush and Ronald Reagan, quoted Charles, the Prince of Wales, and the actor KEVIN KLINE quoted Shakespeare as they joined the chorus opposing an apartment building planned for the Upper East Side.They appeared before the New York City Landmarks Preservation Commission yesterday, following in the footsteps of WOODY ALLEN, who testified in February.At issue is a 16-story tower that a developer wants to build atop a single-story bank branch at Madison Avenue at East 91st Street. Ms. Noonan quoted Prince Charles, who in 1998 compared the planned extension of the facade of the National Gallery in London to ''a monstrous carbuncle on the face of a much loved and elegant friend.''''This is not a monstrous carbuncle,'' she said of the Madison Avenue project, ''but it is a blocker of the sun.''The lines from Act V of ''Richard II'' that Mr. Kline recited -- ''How sour sweet music is when time is broke and no proportion kept'' -- served as a counterpoint to a presentation by the architect PAUL BYARD, whose partner CHARLES A. PLATT was the building's main designer. Mr. Byard said the plan was appropriate for the neighborhood and that the tower would not be ''just a lump on the corner.'' JENNIFER J. RAAB, the commission's chairwoman, said the panel would announce a decision on the project next month.For Puffy Combs, More WaitingThe rap impresario SEAN COMBS is getting used to Lower Manhattan. Yesterday, Mr. Combs, known as Puff Daddy or Puffy Combs, was at State Supreme Court in connection with gun possession and bribery charges tied to a shooting at a Times Square club last year. A judge rejected his request for a trial separate from his co-defendant JAMAL BARROW, who has been charged with three counts of attempted murder for firing shots that hit bystanders. Mr. Combs is accused only of displaying a pistol, not firing it.Not taking no for an answer, one of Mr. Combs's lawyers, BENJAMIN BRAFMAN, argued that Mr. Combs should be tried immediately. The judge, CHARLES H. SOLOMON, did not agree to such a speedy timetable. He said he would rule on the matter next month.''I wanted to start the case today so I can get on with my life,'' Mr. Combs said outside the courtroom.The criminal case is not the only matter that is bringing Mr. Combs to court. Jury selection is scheduled to begin next week in a civil case arising from a 1991 stampede at a City College gymnasium during a celebrity basketball game he promoted. Nine young people were trampled to death, and 29 were injured.''That's a fraudulent case,'' Mr. Combs said yesterday.A Return to NBC In Letterman LandSo DAVID LETTERMAN is going to have a show on NBC again. Not a talk show, but ''Ed,'' a sitcom created by his executive producer, ROB BURNETT, and a former head writer and supervising producer on ''Late Show,'' JON BECKERMAN.This led to a joke by Mr. Burnett -- ''If I had known things were going to work out this well, we never would have stolen the computers on the way out the door at NBC in '93'' -- and for two more ''Late Show'' executive producers, MARIA POPE and BARBARA GAINES. Both are longtime figures in the Letterman universe. Ms. Pope coordinated Mr. Letterman's mother's appearances at the 1994 Winter Olympics; Ms. Gaines has been with him since his 1980 show on NBC and has worked on all 1,810 ''Late Night'' broadcasts on NBC and all 1,405 ''Late Show'' broadcasts on CBS.''Ed'' is not the only show Mr. Burnett and Mr. Letterman's production company, Worldwide Pants, have been working on. CBS is expected to announce it is scheduling a Worldwide Pants program starring CHRISTINE BARANSKI and JIM GAFFIGAN as a weather forecaster from Indiana. It is a sitcom, not a biography of Mr. Letterman, who was once a weather forecaster and grew up in Indiana.JAMES BARRON with Florence Fabricant
Vice President Al Gore has assembled a large team of foreign policy advisers whose members could form the national security nucleus of a Gore administration.The current role of the advisory group is somewhat nebulous, however, since Mr. Gore has never relied on outsiders for advice on foreign policy, and the new panel has not yet contributed much of substance to his campaign.Vice President Al Gore has assembled a large team of foreign policy advisers whose members could form the national security nucleus of a Gore administration.The current role of the advisory group is somewhat nebulous, however, since Mr. Gore has never relied on outsiders for advice on foreign policy, and the new panel has not yet contributed much of substance to his campaign.The vice president has great faith in his own national security experience and instincts. He has a close, 20-year relationship with his national security alter ego, Leon Fuerth, through whom all foreign policy information flows. The vice president has participated in every major national security debate over the past decade and has access to intelligence and foreign policy expertise throughout the government.But Mr. Gore believes he needs to hear fresh voices on foreign policy, several Gore aides say, and he has begun to assemble a group of advisers who can address foreign policy questions during the campaign and assist in the transition should Mr. Gore win in November.The vice president's advisory group now includes 25 people, many of whom are veterans of the early years of the Clinton administration, and the list of experts is expected to swell to include as many as 100 names over the next several weeks.The advisory board will someday provide material for speeches and position papers, but for now the group appears to exist chiefly as the foreign policy arm of a government-in-waiting.The panel includes a number of respected academics, former ambassadors and former subcabinet officers, but its members are less well known than Gov. George W. Bush's team of foreign policy advisers, who call themselves the Vulcans after the Greek god of fire and the forge.The Bush group includes Paul D. Wolfowitz, Richard L. Armitage, Richard Perle, Robert B. Zoellick and Stephen J. Hadley, all of whom served in senior national security posts in the Reagan and Bush administrations. Mr. Bush also consults with Richard B. Cheney, the former secretary of defense, and George P. Shultz, the former secretary of state. Condoleezza Rice, a former top Russia specialist at the National Security Council, coordinates the Bush foreign policy advisory team.''Bush needs them,'' said Marc C. Ginsberg, a longtime friend of President Clinton who served as envoy to Morocco from 1994 to 1998 and who is now one of two coordinators of the Gore foreign policy group. ''He needs the best possible A-list of foreign policy advisers to compensate for his lack of experience and knowledge. Al Gore doesn't suffer from the same deficiencies.''Mr. Gore's group includes former Senator James Sasser, who was ambassador to China from 1996 to 1999; Laura D'Andrea Tyson, the former head of the National Economic Council; Joan E. Spero, former under secretary of state for economic affairs, and Ashton B. Carter and Graham T. Allison, Harvard professors who served at the Pentagon in President Clinton's first term. Mel Levine, a former Democratic congressman from Los Angeles, Robert E. Hunter, a former ambassador to NATO, and Richard N. Gardner, whose government experience dates to the Kennedy administration, are also on the list.Their role remains indistinct and there is little evidence that Mr. Gore will turn to them for foreign policy guidance any time soon. Unlike the Bush group, they are not holding regular briefings for the vice president, who is as broadly knowledgeable about foreign policy as anyone in the Democratic Party. They have not been canvassed for policy advice or speech drafts. Nor are they authorized to speak to the press on behalf of the Gore campaign. The list of their names was produced only after repeated requests from a reporter.Nonetheless, competition for spots on the list is fierce because the group is seen as the farm team for senior jobs in a Gore administration, should the vice president win in November. Serving on the ad hoc Gore committee is also a prestigious resume addition for the part-time advisers, many of whom also advise private clients at the same time they give foreign policy counsel to the Gore campaign.Part of the work of Mr. Ginsberg and his co-director, Bruce W. Jentleson, director of the Terry Sanford Institute of Public Policy at Duke University, is to screen potential members of the advisory group for conflicts of interest. They said that nobody who had pending business before the government or who was a registered lobbyist for a foreign country would be invited to join the group.Since returning from Morocco in 1998, Mr. Ginsberg, a lawyer, has gone into business raising capital for small firms and advising companies on doing business in North Africa and the Middle East. He said he did not represent any foreign governments, nor does his name show up on the Justice Department's list of registered foreign agents.Mr. Ginsberg said he had tried to help Gerber Products build a baby formula factory in Gaza with Israeli and Palestinian participation, but the project never got off the ground. This week Mr. Ginsberg was in Morocco to speak at a conference on electronic commerce sponsored by Havas MediMedia, the health care information division of a French advertising company.The policy of keeping lobbyists off the advisory panel may be hard to enforce, since some of those on the list, including Mr. Levine, work at large law firms that do some lobbying.Mr. Jentleson, who served in the State Department's office of policy planning early in the Clinton administration, said Mr. Gore was reaching beyond the Beltway for fresh ideas. He said Mr. Gore depended on Mr. Fuerth and Samuel R. Berger, the White House national security adviser, for day-to-day foreign policy guidance. Mr. Gore also consults regularly with Richard C. Holbrooke, the United Nations ambassador, whom many consider the leading candidate for secretary of state in a Gore administration.Mr. Gore wants to hear a range of voices as he begins to formulate an approach to global affairs that may at times differ from that of Mr. Clinton, Mr. Jentleson said. But the members of the group are well within the mainstream of the Democratic Party, generally supporting global engagement, protection of the environment and free trade, he added.The panel is being assembled with an eye toward quickly staffing a Gore administration, Mr. Jentleson said. ''By asking them to join this group we're not making any promises, he said. ''But if Gore wins the election, it's a lot better to start on Wednesday with a group of people you know than to start looking at a pile of resumes.''Foreign policy veterans and even some advisers to Mr. Gore suggest that the group is largely window-dressing at this point, assembled in part to make it look as though Mr. Gore is not dependent wholly on his own foreign policy ideas and those of Mr. Fuerth. Membership on the panel also gives foreign policy thinkers in the Democratic Party a stake in a victory by the vice president in November.''Every campaign I've ever heard of does this,'' said a foreign policy expert who has advised several campaigns and who insisted that his name not be printed. ''But I can say that I've never heard of a single instance of a paper from that system making its way to the candidate.''He said that Mr. Fuerth tightly controlled what reached Mr. Gore and that the two of them made all important decisions with little outside advice. Mr. Gore did not draw on the advisory group in preparing his most recent address on foreign policy, delivered on May 1 in Boston, aides said. The vice president wrote much of the speech himself, with assistance from Mr. Fuerth and other members of the White House national security staff, they said. In the speech, Mr. Gore called for an activist foreign policy of ''forward engagement'' and criticized Mr. Bush for hewing to what he called an obsolete cold-war mentality.The advisory group structure serves one useful purpose: bypassing the limitations placed on political activity by government employees. Most full-time government workers cannot engage in political activity, although certain senior advisers like Mr. Fuerth are exempt from the rule.''I cannot use members of the vice president's national security staff or others on the federal payroll to provide political advice for the campaign,'' Mr. Fuerth said. ''I need an external skeleton of people to provide advice for me so I can provide advice for the vice president.''Mr. Fuerth said the outside advisers would become more active as the campaign progressed, serving as surrogate speakers, drafting speeches and responding to press questions on national security matters. But they will never serve as the foreign policy ''brain'' of the Gore operation. That job is already taken, Mr. Fuerth said.''Everyone needs bright minds,'' Mr. Fuerth said, ''but I could drop dead tomorrow and the vice president could keep going for quite some time based simply on what he personally knows and understands.''THE 2000 CAMPAIGN: THE FOREIGN POLICY TEAMS
The Federal Reserve adopted a more aggressive stance today in its fight against inflation, voting to push short-term interest rates up by half a percentage point to try to slow the headlong pace of economic growth.Concerned that the economy continues to exceed what the Fed considers to be its speed limit, the central bank put aside its recent preference for small adjustments to monetary policy in favor of an attention-grabbing increase of half a percentage point. The move was intended to make clear that it will do what it takes to bring growth under control.The Federal Reserve adopted a more aggressive stance today in its fight against inflation, voting to push short-term interest rates up by half a percentage point to try to slow the headlong pace of economic growth.Concerned that the economy continues to exceed what the Fed considers to be its speed limit, the central bank put aside its recent preference for small adjustments to monetary policy in favor of an attention-grabbing increase of half a percentage point. The move was intended to make clear that it will do what it takes to bring growth under control.Dashing the hopes of investors that this move -- which follows a series of five quarter-point rate increases over the last 11 months -- might be the last for a while, the Fed also signaled that there may well be more to come.''Today's move is clearly an escalation of the Fed's anti-inflation campaign,'' said David Orr, chief economist at First Union.The Fed's action immediately led some banks to raise their prime lending rates for loans to small business customers to 9.5 percent from 9 percent. It is also likely to lead to higher rates on auto and home equity loans and credit cards. The effect on mortgages is more difficult to predict. [Page C1.]It was the first time the central bank raised rates by at least half a percentage point in more than five years, and it lifted the Fed's benchmark federal funds target rate on overnight loans among banks to 6.5 percent, its highest level since January 1991.The central bank also raised its seldom-used discount rate on loans to banks from the Federal Reserve system by half a point, to 6 percent.By raising the official rates it controls, the Fed tries to put upward pressure on the rates paid by companies and by consumers, and in that way to put a damper on economic activity.For all the Fed's concern about inflation over the last year, there is little evidence of any sustained surge in prices or wages, and the move drew criticism from some business groups and political leaders as unnecessary.Just hours before the Fed's vote today, the Labor Department reported that consumer prices in April were stable. The consumer price index was unchanged for the month after sharp increases in February and March. And the ''core'' index -- excluding volatile food and energy prices -- rose just 0.2 percent.Senator Byron L. Dorgan, a Democrat from North Dakota, said the Fed's interest rate increases amounted to an unjustified tax increase on American families. Jerry Jasinowski, president of the National Association of Manufacturers, said gains in worker productivity, or output per hour, were more than offsetting inflation pressures, and he called the Fed's action ''unnecessary shock treatment.''But the Fed, which has always said it is easier to prevent inflation than to eradicate it after it has infected the economy, justified its action as a necessary vaccination.In a statement, the Fed's policy- setting Open Market Committee stressed that demand for goods and services from the vibrant business expansion outstripped the available supply, an equation that every basic economic textbook says will eventually lead to rising prices. Not even the gains from productivity can be counted on to keep inflation in check if the economy continues to run red hot, the statement said.''The committee is concerned that this disparity in the growth of demand and potential supply will continue,'' the statement said, ''which could foster inflationary imbalances that would undermine the economy's outstanding performance.''In a signal to investors not to assume that this cycle of rate increases is over, the committee added that ''the risks are weighted mainly toward conditions that may generate heightened inflation pressures in the foreseeable future.''The Fed's decision to raise rates by half a point had been widely anticipated by investors. Stock prices, which had been up before the Fed's announcement at 2:15 p.m., fell back after right afterward but then rebounded. The Dow Jones industrial average closed at 10,934.57, up 126.79. The Nasdaq composite index rose 109.92 to close at 3,717.57. Bond prices also rose, driving the yield on the 10-year Treasury note down to 6.42 percent from 6.45 percent.There is considerable debate among economists about how fast the economy can grow without igniting inflation. But even though Alan Greenspan, the Fed chairman, has been willing to give the economy far more running room than he probably would have just a few years ago, he has consistently said that the ''new economy'' -- in which technology and Internet stocks have made their impact felt -- is still subject to the basic laws of supply and demand.Mr. Greenspan has focused in particular on the shrinking pool of workers available to employers, noting that eventually wage increases will accelerate to inflationary levels. The unemployment rate -- 3.9 percent in April -- is the lowest in more than 30 years.Mr. Greenspan has also said that the economy has been able to meet the robust demand from consumers in part by importing more goods from abroad, a trend that the United States cannot afford to sustain forever. To the degree that additional demand cannot be met from abroad, it could lead to a surge in prices.After months in which he singled out the stock market as the source of much of the excess demand in the economy, Mr. Greenspan has publicly shifted his emphasis in recent months to slowing the economy and halting the decline in unemployment.But despite the five previous rate increases starting last June, the economy grew 7.3 percent in the fourth quarter of last year and 5.4 percent in the first quarter of this year. That was well above the roughly 4 percent that many economists now think is sustainable without generating higher inflation.There are some signs that the earlier rate increases are having an effect. Consumer spending, the primary engine of demand in this business cycle, cooled off somewhat in April, with retail sales falling 0.2 percent. But other indicators, like the pace of housing starts and auto sales, suggest that the economy remains in overdrive.Whether the Fed raises rates again at its next meeting in late June -- and by how much -- largely depends on what the economic data reveals over the next five weeks. Many economists now assume that the Fed will raise rates by at least another quarter point in June.''They certainly leave the way open to further tightening, and almost certainly further tightening will occur,'' said Bruce Steinberg, chief economist at Merrill Lynch. ''The question is how much.''The Fed's goal is not to stop the economy in its tracks, but to achieve a ''soft landing,'' in which inflation pressures recede but the expansion continues at a more moderate pace, avoiding a recession.The last time the Fed tried to engineer a soft landing, in 1994 and early 1995, it succeeded, but only after doubling its target rate to 6 percent from 3 percent in seven steps. In that cycle it raised rates by half a point three times and by three-quarters of a point once.Based on his record in keeping the expansion going, Mr. Greenspan has enjoyed widespread bipartisan support even as he has raised interest rates. Both Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush of Texas have expressed confidence in him, and so far the Fed has not been an issue in the presidential campaign.The Fed has rarely been shy about tinkering with interest rates during presidential campaigns, but it has always avoided doing so in the month or so before the election. Some analysts suggested that today's action was intended to get as much monetary tightening as possible out of the way before the campaign gets into full gear.''If the Fed's job is done by June 28, and we believe that it will be, there won't be a need to act closer to the election,'' said Richard Yamarone, director of economic research at Argus Research. ''In that case, the Fed will have stayed ahead of the curve and taken the Federal Reserve and the tightening cycle out of the political process.''FED LIFTS KEY RATE BY  1/2 POINT, TO 6.5%
In cafes, on street corners and in front of newsstands, many people in Washington Heights have been heatedly talking for weeks about the tactics of the presidential campaign and the merits of the candidates. But in their rapid-fire Spanish, they aren't speaking of Al Gore or George W. Bush. Instead, they intone the names Balaguer, Mejia and Medina, the three men seeking the presidency of the Dominican Republic.And yesterday in the Heights, heart of the nation's largest enclave of immigrants from the Caribbean, the fervor for presidential politics reached a fever pitch as their relatives on the island went to the polls to choose a president.In cafes, on street corners and in front of newsstands, many people in Washington Heights have been heatedly talking for weeks about the tactics of the presidential campaign and the merits of the candidates. But in their rapid-fire Spanish, they aren't speaking of Al Gore or George W. Bush. Instead, they intone the names Balaguer, Mejia and Medina, the three men seeking the presidency of the Dominican Republic.And yesterday in the Heights, heart of the nation's largest enclave of immigrants from the Caribbean, the fervor for presidential politics reached a fever pitch as their relatives on the island went to the polls to choose a president.That those who stayed in New York could not vote did not seem to matter: they passionately argued politics on street corners, tuned in to Spanish-language broadcasts and phoned relatives on the island.''The Dominican, every Dominican immigrant, keeps feeling for his country,'' said Bienvenido Ovalles, 60, turning for a moment away from a heated political discussion on St. Nicholas Avenue. ''The Dominican is very much involved in the election, even though he is absent. He may not be there, but his heart is always in his homeland.''Political parties on the island have long known that to get an edge in the fractious world of Dominican politics, it is smart to seek votes and money in New York's Dominican population, which, at around 600,000, is second in size only to the Dominican capital, Santo Domingo.That has meant raffles and $500-a-plate fund-raisers in Manhattan hotels and Jimmy's Bronx Cafe. It has meant stump speeches, caravans of cars and rallies where Dominican immigrants have been urged to return home to vote, or even tell their relatives back home whom to vote for. It has meant that Tati Ayala, who works at EZ Vision Tours and Travel, has sold at least 150 airline tickets to Dominicans who, she said, flew home simply to vote.''This is like a small slice of the Dominican Republic, like a city in the Republic,'' said Mario Caraballo, a local organizer for the Social Christian Reformist Party, whose leader is the former president, Joaquin Balaguer, 93. ''The parties have organized here because the people here are an economic power.''Dr. Silvio Torres-Saillant, director of the Dominican Studies Institute at City College, said Dominican political parties have become highly adept at stirring nationalist sentiment among the rapidly growing Dominican population.''The political parties have done an excellent job of keeping Dominicans from breaking their political umbilical cord, by turning New York City and all Dominican neighborhoods throughout the United States into arenas for island politics,'' said Dr. Torres-Saillant. ''So they come, they establish chapters, they do fund-raising here. They promise positions to Dominicans here.''Indeed, Mr. Caraballo said, his party pushed hard for months to garner support in New York. The party's local branch conducted polls in New York to gauge support, raised $56,000 in two big-ticket fund-raisers and even helped pay for airfare so some Dominican supporters could go home to vote, he said. ''Every party does this kind of thing,'' Mr. Caraballo explained. ''No one sees anything wrong with it. They all do it.''Dominicans said yesterday that they felt compelled to have some say in politics in their country, whether through campaign contributions or by trying to sway their relatives back home. After all, they noted, Dominicans here maintain an important economic lifeline to the island, sending hundreds of millions of dollars to relatives.In casual conversations, many said they supported Hipolito Mejia of the center-left Dominican Revolutionary Party, who was leading in the polls but was not expected to receive enough votes to avoid a June 30 runoff against Mr. Balaguer or Danilo Medina of the governing Dominican Liberation Party.Not everyone sees the two-country political campaigns as a good thing. Fermin Luna, 63, producer of ''Nueva York de Noche,'' a cable-access program about Dominican issues, said he has long worried that Dominican politicians have exploited immigrants in New York, promising patronage jobs or vast improvements in the standard of living on an island long mired in poverty.''The Dominican lets himself be fooled by promises from politicians from there,'' said Mr. Luna, who came to the United States more than 30 years ago. ''I think to myself, 'Why are we so involved in the Dominican politics when this is where our children are growing up?' ''
THE ISSUESBATTLE OVER BATTLE FLAG -- If South Carolina lawmakers hoped that the N.A.A.C.P. would drop its economic boycott of the state now that they have agreed to move the Confederate battle flag from the Statehouse dome, they had not counted on the group's tenacity. Kweisi Mfume, the national president of the group, said yesterday that the N.A.A.C.P. might even consider expanding the boycott beyond tourism, because the state plans to move the banner to a flagpole in front of the State Capitol, near a monument to Confederate soldiers. Although the group's original boycott resolution demanded that the flag be moved out of a position of sovereignty, Mr. Mfume argued that the flag was no less prominent in front of the building than it was on top. The State Senate and House are expected to iron out minor differences on a bill to move the flag in the next few weeks, and it is scheduled to be lowered on July 1.David Firestone (NYT)THE ISSUESBATTLE OVER BATTLE FLAG -- If South Carolina lawmakers hoped that the N.A.A.C.P. would drop its economic boycott of the state now that they have agreed to move the Confederate battle flag from the Statehouse dome, they had not counted on the group's tenacity. Kweisi Mfume, the national president of the group, said yesterday that the N.A.A.C.P. might even consider expanding the boycott beyond tourism, because the state plans to move the banner to a flagpole in front of the State Capitol, near a monument to Confederate soldiers. Although the group's original boycott resolution demanded that the flag be moved out of a position of sovereignty, Mr. Mfume argued that the flag was no less prominent in front of the building than it was on top. The State Senate and House are expected to iron out minor differences on a bill to move the flag in the next few weeks, and it is scheduled to be lowered on July 1.David Firestone (NYT)THE DEMOCRATSDECISION IN KENNEDY CASE -- The Los Angeles city attorney declined yesterday to file misdemeanor battery charges against Representative Patrick J. Kennedy of Rhode Island over a confrontation with a security guard at Los Angeles International Airport in March. The prosecutor's office summoned Mr. Kennedy, 32, and the guard, Della Patton, 58, to a hearing last week to review a videotape of the incident. Mr. Kennedy had earlier acknowledged acting rudely and apologized, but he denied hurting Ms. Patton. ''I am obviously happy that city officials agree that I did not do what I was accused of,'' Mr. Kennedy said in a statement. George L. Mallory Jr., a lawyer for Ms. Patton, who has complained of shoulder pain and has not worked since the incident, said he expected to approach Mr. Kennedy about a settlement and would sue if those talks failed.Todd S. Purdum (NYT)THE STATESGUBERNATORIAL EARLY BIRD -- It's a year early, but the 2001 governor's race in Virginia is already taking shape, with one self-made millionaire announcing this week that he is stepping aside for another in the Democratic competition. Former congressman L. F. Payne Jr., a Charlottesville developer who lost as the Democratic Party's candidate for lieutenant governor in 1997, took himself out of the running and endorsed Mark R. Warner, who heads a venture capital firm in Alexandria. Mr. Payne said Mr. Warner had ''the right experience, the right ideas and the right values'' to win the governorship. Mr. Payne's base is among rural conservative Democrats and he showed his popularity by finishing ahead of the rest of his ticket in the Democrats' bid to take the Statehouse in 1997. But he conceded that Mr. Warner, whose base is in the northern suburbs, already had a dominant edge in organization and fund-raising among high-tech corporate donors. As he stepped aside, Mr. Payne was accompanied by supporters insisting that he would still be a good candidate for governor in 2005. In the meantime, he may take on a role in Mr. Warner's campaign. The Republican nomination for governor next year is expected to be contested by Lt. Gov. John H. Hager, who defeated Mr. Payne in 1997, and Attorney General Mark L. Earley.Francis X. Clines (NYT)'LIVE TAX FREE OR DIE' -- Gov. Jeanne Shaheen of New Hampshire announced yesterday that she would seek a third two-year term. But she did not say whether she would renew her pledge to veto an income tax, which is seen by some state leaders, albeit reluctantly, as the best way for the state to respond to a court order to reform its school financing system. Year in and year out, taxes are the hottest political issue in New Hampshire, a state that, along with Alaska, has no personal income tax or general sales tax (its official motto is ''Live Free Or Die'') and whose residents take great pride in roughing up politicians who do not pledge to oppose new levies. Governor Shaheen, a Democrat, took ''the pledge'' in her 1996 and 1998 campaigns but she has thus far avoided discussing what she might do in the 2000 campaign -- though she did agree to a temporary tax, at one point, as the state initially tried to respond to the court school-financing order. In this year's Democratic primary, she will face State Senator Mark Fernald, who supports a state income tax to solve the school problem. On the Republican side, four candidates are competing for the nomination, with mixed views on the tax question. There is also an independent candidate.John Kifner (NYT)THE 2000 CAMPAIGN  Correction:  May 22, 2000, Monday  A picture caption on Wednesday about the graduation of Vice President's Al Gore's daughter Karenna Gore Schiff from Columbia Law School referred imprecisely to her degree. She is not the newest lawyer in her immediate family; she is the only one. While Mr. Gore's parents were both lawyers and he attended law school, he did not graduate.Correction: May 22, 2000, MondayA picture caption on Wednesday about the graduation of Vice President's Al Gore's daughter Karenna Gore Schiff from Columbia Law School referred imprecisely to her degree. She is not the newest lawyer in her immediate family; she is the only one. While Mr. Gore's parents were both lawyers and he attended law school, he did not graduate.<br><br>
Gov. George W. Bush of Texas has reignited the debate over the future of Social Security and whether it is a good idea to allow individuals to invest some of their payroll taxes in the stock market.At the same time, Mr. Bush provided few specifics, saying they would be worked out in bipartisan negotiations.Gov. George W. Bush of Texas has reignited the debate over the future of Social Security and whether it is a good idea to allow individuals to invest some of their payroll taxes in the stock market.At the same time, Mr. Bush provided few specifics, saying they would be worked out in bipartisan negotiations.So supporters and critics were left talking yesterday in the same generalities that have dominated the debate for years. And voters were still a long way from being able to figure out how they might be affected and whether a change would be beneficial.Still, the announcement has signaled a change in the debate. Although Vice President Al Gore has attacked the idea as inherently risky, the concept of investing some money from payroll taxes in the stock market seemed to be more acceptable today than it was several years ago.William Shipman, a principal at State Street Global Advisers who is co-chairman of the Cato Institute program on Social Security and a proponent of individual Social Security accounts, said, ''I think that we are coming closer together; the idea that there should be some stock market investment was not in the cards six years ago.''Henry Aaron, a senior fellow at the Brookings Institution who opposes the idea of individuals investing their payroll taxes in the stock market, agreed. ''The idea of investing in the stock market is right,'' Mr. Aaron said. ''It's a good idea to increase the return as much as possible.''But he wants the government to do the investing, not individuals, a position President Clinton once proposed. ''The problem with the individual accounts is that they waste money on needless administrative costs,'' he said.As Mr. Aaron's comment indicated, debate over who does the investing, and how, will continue. And that is where the lack of specifics undermines any analysis.Mr. Shipman, for example, would not comment on how Mr. Bush's proposal dealt with the cost of administering the Social Security accounts of private investors because it did not provide enough detail.But the issue is important: will the costs of running the private accounts by Wall Street firms or mutual fund companies be so high that they will significantly reduce the returns that the individual would get from those accounts?''It is not a necessary condition that administrative costs eat up returns,'' Mr. Shipman said. ''It depends on how you design the system.''He said he has designed a system with very low costs, ranging from two-tenths of 1 percent to three-tenths of 1 percent of the assets in the account.John Mueller, a principal at Lehrman Bell Mueller Cannon Inc., a financial market forecasting company in Chevy Chase, Md., argued that the cost would be much higher.Mr. Mueller, a onetime supporter of privatizing the entire Social Security System, noted that the administrative costs for stock mutual funds in 1998, according to the Investment Company Institute, were 1.35 percent of the assets in the funds.He and others argued that both the administrative costs and the transition costs for shifting to a system with private accounts would consume much of the additional return for many investors. Mr. Mueller's studies contend that investors would be better off under the existing system than the numerous versions that have been proposed.He also faulted Mr. Gore and Mr. Bush for not developing proposals that he said would actually deal with the solvency of Social Security. The system will start paying out more in benefits than it is collecting in payroll taxes in 2015.''Neither Gore nor Bush have a plan for balancing the system,'' Mr. Mueller said.Mr. Shipman dismissed the issue of the transition costs. He argued that if nothing is done to finance Social Security properly, ''there is a transition cost and that is, reasonably, the unfunded liability of the system -- $3 trillion to $8 trillion.''So, he said, the cost of a transition to a new system -- which some suggest would top $1 trillion -- must be compared to the cost of doing nothing about the current system.Among other issues that have not been addressed was how investors who build private Social Security accounts would be treated when they retire. Will they get both the return from their individual account and the benefits that accrued from the rest of their payroll deductions?Mr. Aaron said that a proposal for individual Social Security accounts that had been studied by the House Ways and Means Committee would allow retirees to keep what gave them the largest return -- the benefits based on payroll deductions or the benefits based on individual accounts.He said that an analysis of this proposal showed that only 5 percent of the money from the individual accounts actually went to beneficiaries. The rest went back into the Social Security system and would be used, he said, to help pay off the transition costs.And what benefits would a retiree get -- and how would the Social Security system cover them -- if the retiree was allowed, as Mr. Bush proposed, to pass on the assets in the individual accounts to his or her heirs?Mr. Bush will also face another nagging question: why does he put so much faith in the stock market if his chief economic adviser, Lawrence B. Lindsey, is so bearish?Almost two years ago, Mr. Lindsey said that he had sold all of his equity holdings because stock prices were overvalued. At the time, the Dow Jones industrial average was around 8,500. Despite this year's almost 5 percent sell-off, the Dow closed yesterday at 10934.57.THE 2000 CAMPAIGN: THE STOCK MARKET PROPOSAL
Taking the offensive against Gov. George W. Bush's proposal to let workers invest some of their Social Security taxes, Vice President Al Gore asserted yesterday that the plan would hurt the very baby boomers it is intended to help by placing their retirement savings at the mercy of ruthless and whimsical markets.In an event intended to sway younger voters who have grown accustomed to gravity-defying markets and are more likely to be receptive to the Bush plan, the vice president painted a bleak picture of unsophisticated taxpayers losing their savings in fraudulent, risky or just plain bad investments.Taking the offensive against Gov. George W. Bush's proposal to let workers invest some of their Social Security taxes, Vice President Al Gore asserted yesterday that the plan would hurt the very baby boomers it is intended to help by placing their retirement savings at the mercy of ruthless and whimsical markets.In an event intended to sway younger voters who have grown accustomed to gravity-defying markets and are more likely to be receptive to the Bush plan, the vice president painted a bleak picture of unsophisticated taxpayers losing their savings in fraudulent, risky or just plain bad investments.The result, he warned graduate students at Fordham Business School in Manhattan, would be a costly taxpayer-financed bailout of failed investors that would dwarf the multibillion-dollar rescue of bankrupt savings and loans in the 1980's. And yesterday, Mr. Bush suggested he might support allowing workers to invest a large portion of their payroll taxes, which Mr. Gore said would increase the chances of financial disaster.''Tens of millions of investors who have not gone through the Fordham Business School, who have not had an opportunity to gain some basic knowledge to protect themselves against fraud,'' Mr. Gore said, ''would be placed in a situation where a lot of financial shenanigans could take place, where they are losing their investments because they are not equipped in the way that sophisticated investors are. It happens all the time.''But Mr. Bush accused the vice president of flip-flopping on the issue, releasing a videotape from January 1999 showing Mr. Gore arguing that it might make sense for the federal government to invest some revenue in the stock market to take advantage of its historically strong returns.Asked on the tape whether long-term stock investments would be safe, Mr. Gore replies: ''Over any 10-year period in American history returns on equities are just significantly higher than these other returns. And in order to capture some part of that economic advantage, surely there is a way to solve these problems.''When asked about his remarks yesterday, the vice president said that he was talking about investing general tax revenues and not money from the Social Security trust fund -- an idea the Clinton administration was considering at the time. He also suggested that his views had changed after hearing debate over the proposal.But Mr. Bush asserted that Mr. Gore had switched positions for political purposes. ''I believe it's important to be consistent,'' he said in a news conference in Portland, Ore. ''I believe it's important to have somebody willing to take a stand.''The day's swirling debate underscored Mr. Gore's desire to block Mr. Bush from seizing the advantage -- particularly among young voters -- on an issue that historically has played to the strengths of Democratic candidates.For decades, Social Security has been a powerful Democratic weapon because it is so important to the most active group of voters in the electorate: the elderly. Older people have also tended to vote Democratic, so for years Democrats have successfully turned out their core voters by accusing Republicans of wanting to end or undermine the Social Security system.But Mr. Bush's proposal could change that dynamic by making Social Security more relevant to younger voters who have grown skeptical about the system's viability but are also comfortable with the idea of investing in Wall Street. Polls show those younger voters supported President Clinton in 1996.''I think Bush is slicing into part of the Democratic coalition with this,'' said Andrew Smith, director of polling for the University of New Hampshire. ''But if older voters can be convinced that this plan is a threat to their Social Security, Bush will have problems.''Mr. Gore plans to make that argument to retirees in Florida on Wednesday.In making Social Security a major campaign issue, Mr. Gore and Mr. Bush have offered sharply different proposals for extending the life of the system, which is projected to become insolvent by the year 2037.Mr. Bush argues that allowing workers to invest a small portion of their payroll taxes would enable them to take advantage of the wealth created by Wall Street and reduce the cost to taxpayers of financing the system. But his plan would also leave those investors vulnerable to losses from market fluctuations.Mr. Gore would not change the current system that guarantees a minimum benefit. To prolong the system's life, Mr. Gore proposes using the Social Security surplus to pay down the national debt and then devoting the interest saved to the retirement system. The proposal would keep the system solvent until 2054, he contends.Mr. Bush's event yesterday, like Mr. Gore's, was designed to take the issue beyond the elderly, as he tailored his message to the blue-collar work force at a Portland company that makes railroad freight cars and marine barges.Mr. Gore's advisers contend that such working-class voters are more fiscally conservative, less comfortable with the idea of investing in Wall Street and likely to be opposed to Mr. Bush's plan.Mr. Bush tried to show that was not the case yesterday. Leading a discussion with workers who spoke highly of their 401(k) plan, the governor suggested that opponents of his plan do not trust working Americans to manage their own money.''You know I wonder out loud whether there may be some in Washington saying these workers are not smart enough to figure it out,'' Mr. Bush said. ''I wonder whether or not that's what people may be really saying deep down. You can't trust individuals in America who maybe don't have Ph.D.'s in economics.''But even as he sought to sell his proposal, Mr. Bush -- who has not provided details for many aspects of the plan -- made several remarks that are likely to provide fodder for additional attacks from Mr. Gore.First, Mr. Bush left open the possibility that his call for limited accounts was just the first step in a broader transformation of the federal retirement system. Answering a question about his plan, Mr. Bush said that the government could not go ''from one regime to another overnight.'' He said: ''It's going to take a while to transition to a system where personal savings accounts are the predominant part of the investment vehicle. And so, this is a step toward a completely different world and an important step.''Mr. Bush has refused to say what proportion of the 12.4 percent payroll tax people could put into private accounts under his plan.Mr. Bush also refused to say how much benefits might be reduced for workers who created private investment accounts.''That's all up for discussion,'' Mr. Bush said.With many finance majors present at his Fordham event, Mr. Gore noted that he supported individuals investing in the stock market for retirement, provided no Social Security funds are involved. But to bolster his point that the markets can be risky, he brought along several experts, including Robert E. Rubin, a Wall Street executive who was Treasury secretary until last year.''I've been involved with markets virtually my entire working life,'' Mr. Rubin told the group. ''There is no question, stocks have risks.''In many ways, Mr. Gore's arguments might have seemed a tough sell to a youthful audience that was both knowledgeable about financial markets and accustomed to hearing that the best retirement savings are in the stock market.Indeed, many students' questions indicated a general support for the idea of private investment accounts. But several students said after the event that Mr. Gore had raised deep questions in their minds about the Bush plan.''When he says there are certain to be losers, that's a compelling argument,'' said Scott Horton, a 27-year-old finance major.THE 2000 CAMPAIGN: THE VICE PRESIDENT
Republican Rift on Kosovo  George W. Bush criticized a bill backed by Senate Republicans to set a deadline for withdrawing ground troops from Kosovo.PAGE A11Republican Rift on Kosovo  George W. Bush criticized a bill backed by Senate Republicans to set a deadline for withdrawing ground troops from Kosovo.PAGE A11Dominican Republic Votes  The left-leaning Hipolito Mejia led in early returns in the Dominican presidential election.PAGE A4The Man Who Redid Seattle  A Microsoft co-founder's influence on Seattle has been likened to that of a friendly, 800-pound gorilla -- or a Medici.PAGE A14Flyers Overcome Devils  Philadelphia's 4-3 victory evened its series with New Jersey at 1-1.SPORTSWEDNESDAY, PAGE D1
To the Editor:Re ''Bush Candidacy Puts Focus on Executions'' (front page, May 14):Important and lifesaving as the Illinois moratorium, the Innocence Project at Benjamin N. Cardozo Law School and brave individual efforts may be, the real issue is that Texas has killed 127 human beings, not that one or more may have been innocent.To the Editor:Re ''Bush Candidacy Puts Focus on Executions'' (front page, May 14):Important and lifesaving as the Illinois moratorium, the Innocence Project at Benjamin N. Cardozo Law School and brave individual efforts may be, the real issue is that Texas has killed 127 human beings, not that one or more may have been innocent.We need to recognize that the death penalty is both cruel and incompatible with an enlightened humanity in the 21st century. And we need to be sure that the next president, with power to appoint Supreme Court justices, is not irrevocably committed to the execution of our citizens, no matter how heinous their actions.MARGARET P. LEVY  Hartford, May 15, 2000
To the Editor:It is disturbing that Gov. George W. Bush, the man who could be our next president, could approach the death penalty in Texas with such apparent disregard for potential errors in the process (front page, May 14).He is confident that none of the 127 inmates executed under his watch were innocent. He dismisses Gov. George Ryan's announcement of a moratorium on executions in Illinois with a glib, ''Maybe they've had some faulty judgments.''To the Editor:It is disturbing that Gov. George W. Bush, the man who could be our next president, could approach the death penalty in Texas with such apparent disregard for potential errors in the process (front page, May 14).He is confident that none of the 127 inmates executed under his watch were innocent. He dismisses Gov. George Ryan's announcement of a moratorium on executions in Illinois with a glib, ''Maybe they've had some faulty judgments.''Does Mr. Bush truly believe that juries in Illinois might make an error, yet juries in Texas are immune from them?DAVID SHERMAN  Portland, Ore., May 14, 2000
To the Editor:Re ''Bush Candidacy Puts Focus on Executions'' (front page, May 14):Republican supporters of George W. Bush for the presidency take his word for it that he's the ''compassionate'' one, deserving to lead our country. But if he has such a human heart that he can ''suffer with'' others (as compassion means), why is he not doing something about the rush to kill in the execution chambers of his state?To the Editor:Re ''Bush Candidacy Puts Focus on Executions'' (front page, May 14):Republican supporters of George W. Bush for the presidency take his word for it that he's the ''compassionate'' one, deserving to lead our country. But if he has such a human heart that he can ''suffer with'' others (as compassion means), why is he not doing something about the rush to kill in the execution chambers of his state?I had to learn what compassion really means when my son and his wife were murdered -- shot to death in their bed by an intruder, an 18-year-old in Montana in August 1993.  That's when the death penalty was no longer an academic question but a gut-level torment.I don't know how this teenager got a gun or what turned him into a killer, but in the end his act didn't get me to devalue life. Life became more important to me than ever, convincing me we've got to stop our death row madness.ANTOINETTE BOSCO  Brookfield, Conn., May 14, 2000
To the Editor:Your May 14 front-page article about executions in Texas under the watch of Gov. George W. Bush provides evidence of what opponents of the death penalty have long argued.The inequity of the death penalty cannot be separated from the fact that those on death row are predominantly poor and without the resources to defend themselves adequately. At the very least, and even if one is not opposed on moral and philosophical grounds to the death penalty, what is needed is a renewed material and philosophical commitment to the office of public defender.To the Editor:Your May 14 front-page article about executions in Texas under the watch of Gov. George W. Bush provides evidence of what opponents of the death penalty have long argued.The inequity of the death penalty cannot be separated from the fact that those on death row are predominantly poor and without the resources to defend themselves adequately. At the very least, and even if one is not opposed on moral and philosophical grounds to the death penalty, what is needed is a renewed material and philosophical commitment to the office of public defender.Overworked, underpaid and too often unqualified lawyers would hardly do for Mr. Bush, if he or one of his family members faced prosecution, on any charge. Yet this seems to be the norm for so many, with so much at stake.RICHARD WELLS  Brooklyn, May 15, 2000
As anyone who has watched Al Gore over the years knows, some of his positions on various topics have a way of evolving. As the vice president himself has acknowledged, this has been true on abortion and gun control.There now seems to be another example: medical marijuana.As anyone who has watched Al Gore over the years knows, some of his positions on various topics have a way of evolving. As the vice president himself has acknowledged, this has been true on abortion and gun control.There now seems to be another example: medical marijuana.Back in December, at a town meeting in Derry, N.H., Mr. Gore indicated that he would favor allowing marijuana to be prescribed for medical purposes.He referred to a strikingly personal experience. His sister, Nancy Gore Hunger, died of lung cancer in 1984 after painful chemotherapy. She was being treated in Tennessee, where medical marijuana was legal at the time, and her doctor -- ''one of the very best in the entire world,'' Mr. Gore said -- had prescribed marijuana. She tried it.''She decided against it because she didn't like it and it didn't produce the desired results for her,'' Mr. Gore told his audience that night. ''But the doctor said, 'Look, this is an option she ought to have available, very carefully monitored and controlled.' And if it had worked for her, I think she should have had the option.''This answer, while heartfelt, deviated sharply from the Clinton administration's policy against medical marijuana. And Mr. Gore's aides quickly called a news conference so that the vice president could clarify his views.''Look, look, let me just say that I'm opposed to anything that opens the door to legalization of marijuana,'' he told reporters. He said that the use of marijuana should be determined by science rather than emotion but that, under certain limited circumstances and if the research validated that choice, it should be allowed.Then he added, ''We are not at that point.''Despite what he said at the news conference, there was an unmistakable perception -- on both sides of the issue -- that Mr. Gore had signaled his support for the practice.Doug Bandow, a senior fellow at the Cato Institute, a libertarian policy organization, hailed the vice president for his ''compassionate and sensible position.''Opponents, like the American Society of Addiction Medicine, complained. In a letter on Dec. 29 to Mr. Gore, James F. Callahan, executive vice president of the group, wrote that Mr. Gore's comments ''seem to be an unmistakable statement that physicians ought to have the option of using marijuana to alleviate pain.''The letter added, ''Though it was reported that in a subsequent meeting with reporters you emphasized that you opposed legalizing marijuana and believe more research is needed to determine whether medicinal marijuana works, these were not the views that were stated publicly for the American people's consumption.''Mr. Gore still gets the occasional question on this subject, as he did last week in California, where voters approved the medicinal use of marijuana. But now, five months after his initial indication that doctors should have the ''flexibility'' to prescribe marijuana, Mr. Gore appears to have become firmer in his opposition, even though there has been no new research in the intervening months to indicate that marijuana works better or worse than anyone thought in December.''Right now the science does not show me, or the experts whose judgment I trust, that it is the proper medication for pain and that there are not better alternatives available in every situation,'' Mr. Gore said in response to a student's question last Thursday at the Elizabeth Learning Center in Cudahy, Calif.The latest medical opinions suggest otherwise. In 1997 the National Academy of Sciences asked the Institute of Medicine, its medical arm, to evaluate all research on the subject, since more states were passing initiatives to allow the medicinal use of marijuana and public opinion was divided. (By now, voters in a half-dozen states and the District of Columbia have approved the medicinal use of marijuana, and Hawaii is on the verge of becoming the first state to pass it into law, rather than decreeing it by ballot initiative.)After two years of research and interviews with three dozen experts, including those representing government agencies, the institute's panel concluded in March 1999 that ''Marijuana's active components are potentially effective in treating pain, nausea, the anorexia of AIDS wasting and other symptoms, and should be tested rigorously in clinical trials,'' the institute said in a news release.The panel said that smoking marijuana could cause other health problems like cancer, lung damage and low birth-weight for babies born to women who smoke it. For that reason, the panel said, smoking marijuana should only be recommended for terminally ill patients or those with debilitating symptoms that do not respond to approved medicines. It also said that no one should smoke it for more than six months.Dr. John A. Benson Jr., the co-principal investigator of the institute's report who is the dean of the Oregon Health Sciences University School of Medicine in Portland, said in an interview that no new information had emerged over the last year to alter the panel's views.He said there had been some experimentation with a patch system in an effort to find an alternative to inhalation because ''smoking is a poor way of delivering medicine.'' And he said synthetic versions with components of marijuana were effective for 75 percent to 90 percent of patients.But he added that ''there are some patients that don't respond to these better drugs,'' and that smoking marijuana can ease their discomfort, particularly in cases of nausea, when patients cannot take pills.Mr. Gore's aides insisted that the vice president's position as articulated last week in California was no different from what he had said at his news conference after the New Hampshire town meeting.But Mr. Bandow of Cato, who had heard encouragement in Mr. Gore's remarks in December, said he detected a difference now.''I think quite clearly he's retreated,'' Mr. Bandow said in an interview. ''It was an opportunity to move out there and take some new ground and indicate some greater sophistication, and voters appreciate that.''THE 2000 CAMPAIGN: THE EVOLUTION OF A POSITION
Following are excerpts from Hillary Rodham Clinton's remarks to the New York State Democratic Convention last night in Albany:Tonight I'm deeply honored and humbled to accept the nomination of the New York Democratic Party for the United States Senate. . . .Following are excerpts from Hillary Rodham Clinton's remarks to the New York State Democratic Convention last night in Albany:Tonight I'm deeply honored and humbled to accept the nomination of the New York Democratic Party for the United States Senate. . . .And I pledge to you that I will work my heart out every day in this campaign to become your next senator. And I will work every day in the Senate to keep faith with you, with the values and the ideals of the Democratic Party of New York.Because make no mistake about it: This election is not about me or about any Republican opponent. It's about the people of New York, and the mission that we are pledged to. What is that mission? I think it is to strengthen our families and to protect our children, to improve our schools and to extend health care to every New Yorker. To free our families and our communities from the terror of gun violence. Strengthen Social Security and modernize Medicare. Ensure America's continued leadership in the world.It was, after all, New York Democrats who led the way in building the great American middle class. In giving rise to the labor union, to civil rights, to women's rights, to gay rights.We can continue leading this by building on the progress of the last seven years. Twenty-one million new jobs, balanced budgets, lowered crime, stronger schools, better child care, a cleaner environment, a safer and more inclusive American community. And our thanks must go to Vice President Al Gore and President Bill Clinton.New York has made tremendous strides in the last seven years. But there are still too many forgotten New Yorkers. Millions of children without the families, health care or education they need to prepare them for the future. Millions of mothers and fathers working full time but still stressed with too little money or too little time. An upstate economy that isn't generating enough jobs to keep our young people here.We have some of the greatest institutions of higher learning in the nation. Yet too many of our students still can't afford a college education.We have some of the best public schools around. Yet far too many of our students are crammed into overcrowded, dilapidated school buildings more suited to the 19th century than the 21st.We have the finest hospitals in the world. Yet more than half a million children in New York do not have health insurance, and two million older New Yorkers cannot afford their prescription drugs.We have the most beautiful scenery -- from the Finger Lakes to the Adirondacks to Long Island's beaches. Yet we face environmental challenges to our air, our water and our health.I know we can do better and New York should not settle for less.We owe it to ourselves and to our children.
INTERNATIONALA3-12Israelis Credit Barak As Violence Abates  The morning after Palestinian rioting disintegrated into fierce gunfire, many Israeli and even some Palestinian political analysts were surprised to find themselves crediting Prime Minister Ehud Barak with defusing the crisis. The gun battles between Israeli and Palestinian forces had ended by morning, although low-level clashes continued.A8INTERNATIONALA3-12Israelis Credit Barak As Violence Abates  The morning after Palestinian rioting disintegrated into fierce gunfire, many Israeli and even some Palestinian political analysts were surprised to find themselves crediting Prime Minister Ehud Barak with defusing the crisis. The gun battles between Israeli and Palestinian forces had ended by morning, although low-level clashes continued.A8Arabs gave a martyr's burial to a 20-year-old Palestinian policeman who was killed on Monday during an exchange of gunfire with Israelis.A8U.S. Opposes Iran Loans  The Clinton administration will oppose the first World Bank loans offered to Iran in seven years, even though Secretary of State Madeleine K. Albright declared some easing of sanctions recently, officials said.A11Bid to Improve Peacekeeping  The American ambassador to the United Nations, Richard C. Holbrooke, called for an overhaul of peacekeeping operations and for more money from member nations to make the operations effective. Some diplomats, while agreeing change is needed, said the United States was partly responsible for the problem.A10Bush Opposes Kosovo Deadline  Gov. George W. Bush criticized a bill backed by fellow Republicans in the Senate that would set a deadline for withdrawing American ground troops from Kosovo.A11Zimbabwe Agrees to Monitors  President Robert Mugabe agreed to let Commonwealth observers monitor a parliamentary election he called for June 24 and 25, according to the Commonwealth secretary general, Don McKinnon.A3Ethiopia Military Drive  Ethiopia has taken control of a now empty town that once belonged to Eritrea as part of what appeared to be a successful drive into Eritrea in the latest flare-up of fighting.A10Labor Unrest in China  Nearly 2,000 workers owed back pay, joined by retirees owed pensions, have besieged a factory and government offices in the northeastern city of Liaoyang, in the latest example of growing labor unrest as once-dominant state industries collapse.A12Dominican Republic Elections  Dominicans turned out in large numbers in a multicandidate presidential election. No candidate is expected to win a majority, but early this morning preliminary results based on 27.7 percent of the polling places were giving 49 percent of the vote to Hipolito Mejia of the left-leaning Dominican Revolutionary Party.A4Mexican Candidate Gets Help  Vicente Fox Quesada, the opposition candidate who appears to have a narrow lead in the presidential race, got a public relations boost from two prominent Mexicans with family roots in the governing party.A5World BriefingA6NATIONALA14-21E.P.A. to Issue Rules To Curb Diesel Pollution  The E.P.A. plans to announce new pollution-control rules that will cut truck and bus emissions drastically, in part through a 97 percent reduction in the sulfur content of diesel fuel over the next 10 years. The oil industry opposes the rules, saying diesel fuel prices will rise.A1Wresting a Vote on Gun Control  Democrats used procedural maneuvers to bring the Senate to a halt until Republican leaders promised to allow votes on two gun control measures today.A17Move to Repeal Phone Tax  A House subcommittee held a hearing that was expected to begin the process of repealing a 102-year-old ''luxury'' tax on telephones that was passed to help finance the Spanish American War. The 3 percent tax now costs the average household $50 a year; its repeal would cost the government $5 billion a year.A16Social Security Plan Assailed  Vice President Al Gore asserted that Gov. George W. Bush's proposal to let workers invest some of their Social Security taxes would hurt the very baby boomers it is supposed to help by putting retirement savings at the mercy of the markets.A20Last Radio Calls Before Crash  The government made public a transcript of conversations between air controllers and the crew of Egyptair Flight 990, which crashed in the Atlantic on Oct. 31, killing all 217 people aboard. The transcript showed only routine communications. The cockpit voice recorder transcript is expected to be made public this summer.A16Investigating New Mexico Fire  State and federal officials began an inquiry into why the Park Service started the fire to clear underbrush near Los Alamos despite weather forecasts that would make the fire hard to control. Thousands of residents returned to Los Alamos.A18Better Child Care in Military  A private study said the military had so improved its child care system that it should serve as a model for state and national programs.A19A Washington Fixture Departs  Helen Thomas, 79, a White House reporter since John F. Kennedy was president, resigned from U.P.I. a day after the news service was acquired by the company that publishes The Washington Times.A18SCIENCE/HEALTH3M Environmental Concerns  The giant consumer products company said it would stop making many of its Scotchgard products after tests showed chemical compounds linger in the environment for years.A19A Death in Antarctica  An Australian astrophysicist died suddenly of undetermined causes on Friday at a research center operated by the National Science Foundation, and his body must remain there until the Southern winter ends in October. It was only the third death at the pole in nearly 35 years.A15NEW YORK/REGIONB1-7Mrs. Clinton Is Nominated, To Face Unknown Opponent  The New York State Democratic Party nominated Hillary Rodham Clinton as its candidate for senator. In her acceptance speech, in Albany, she portrayed the campaign as a contest between political philosophies, an attack not on any candidate but on Republican policies that aides said would stand whether her opponent ended up being Mayor Giuliani or some other Republican.B1Mr. Giuliani met with doctors about his prostate cancer and gave no indication of his political plans.B6New Jersey Senate Debate  Jon S. Corzine and Jim Florio clashed on gun control, national security and taxes, with each of the Democrats trying to portray himself as the stronger champion of the elderly and working families.B5Order to Curtail Pollution  Gov. John G. Rowland plans to sign an executive order today that is intended to sharply cut emissions from Connecticut's six antiquated coal- and oil-burning power plants and dozens of other plants within three years, joining New York and Massachusetts in moving to curb pollution that causes acid rain and smog.B1Vallone Plan to Monitor Police  City Council Speaker Peter Vallone renewed his call for a city-sponsored police watchdog panel, which he said would discourage federal intervention in local police affairs.B3Effort on Patronage Opposed  An association of city judges opposes an effort by the state's chief administrative judge to curtail political patronage in the court system.B3EDUCATIONB8Levy Wins Mayor's Support  Mayor Giuliani said he would support the appointment of Harold O. Levy as chancellor of city schools, virtually assuring his choice by the Board of Education at its meeting today.A1ARTSE1-10Artist Sues Gallery  Al Hirschfeld, 96, the renowned caricaturist, has taken his longtime dealer, Margo Feiden, and her gallery to court to try to end their contract, saying he had been cheated and should regain control of his work.E1SPORTSD1-8Flyers Pull Even With Devils  Philadelphia beat the Devils, 4-3, to tie the four-of-seven-game Eastern finals at a game apiece.D1OBITUARIESC26-27Karl Shapiro  The Pulitzer Prize-winning poet was 86 years old.C27BUSINESS DAYC1-25Interest Rates Increased  The Federal Reserve adopted a more aggressive approach to fighting inflation, pushing short-term interest rates up by half a percentage point to try to slow the headlong pace of economic growth. The Fed also signaled that there might well be more rises to come.A1Consumers will quickly begin to feel the pinch as borrowing -- from home equity loans to car and truck financing to credit cards -- becomes more expensive. Rates on fixed-rate mortgages, however, have already climbed and may even retreat some from their current level of about 8.5 percent, specialists said.C1Consumer prices were unchanged in April and new home construction rose, government figures showed, signaling the economy was expanding with little to no inflation.C25Investors widely expected the rate increase. The Dow rose 126.79 points, or 1.2 percent, to 10,934.57; the Nasdaq climbed 109.92 points, or 3.1 percent, to 3,717.57; and the S.& P. 500 jumped 13.68 points, to 1,466.04.C10Coke Shares Decline  Coca-Cola's largest bottler, Coca-Cola Enterprises, said it would not meet its growth target in the United States this year and was facing even bigger hurdles in Britain. Shares of Coca-Cola Enterprises tumbled 30 percent, or $6.9375, to $15.625, a 52-week low, and shares of Coca-Cola fell $3, to $48.9375.C1Business DigestC1DININGF1-12EDITORIALA22-23Editorials: Mrs. Clinton's moment; behind the rate hike; imitations of ''West Wing''; a promising accord in Montana.  Columns: Maureen Dowd, Paul Krugman.CrosswordE4  TV ListingsE9  Public LivesB2  WeatherD7
Embracing a strikingly broad concept of national security, President Clinton told the graduating class of the United States Coast Guard Academy today that the world is becoming more dangerous with new threats from disease, terrorism and even global warming.''The central reality of our time is that the advent of globalization and the revolution in information technology have magnified both the creative and destructive potential of every individual, tribe and nation on our planet,'' he told the audience of 5,000, which included 189 graduating cadets, a third of them women.Embracing a strikingly broad concept of national security, President Clinton told the graduating class of the United States Coast Guard Academy today that the world is becoming more dangerous with new threats from disease, terrorism and even global warming.''The central reality of our time is that the advent of globalization and the revolution in information technology have magnified both the creative and destructive potential of every individual, tribe and nation on our planet,'' he told the audience of 5,000, which included 189 graduating cadets, a third of them women.Mr. Clinton also sought to link his message about America's long-term security with the imminent political question of extending trade preferences to China, saying Congress should realize that the vote on the issue next week will have deep implications for America's security.''One of the biggest question marks of the 21st century is the path China will take,'' he said. ''Will China emerge as a partner or an adversary? Will it be a society that is opening to the world and liberating to its people or controlling of its people and lashing out at the world?''If Congress votes to provide China with permanent normal trade relations, Mr. Clinton said, ''it will not guarantee that China will take the right course.'' But, he added, ''I believe a 'no' vote invites a future of dangerous confrontation and constant insecurity.''The kind of global cooperation required in the future, the president said, was in evidence when the authorities foiled a plan by Osama bin Laden, the Saudi exile living in Afghanistan, to smuggle explosive materials into the United States before the New Year. Links between Mr. bin Laden's associates and terrorist plots uncovered in Jordan and at the United States-Canadian border have been widely reported, but the president's comments today were his most extensive on the subject.Presidents have used commencement speeches before the service academies to provide their visions of the future, and Mr. Clinton, in his final such address, offered a view that, while promising, sees menace on many fronts.On a crisp New England day with the Thames River sparkling at his back, Mr. Clinton said that the larger issue for leaders is to maintain a balanced security strategy, one with diplomatic and economic elements as well as military ones.''Globalization is tearing down barriers and building new networks among nations and peoples,'' he said. ''The very openness of our borders and technology, however, also makes us vulnerable in new ways.''While the Internet and developments like the growth of democracy are heartening, ''we must understand the other side of the coin as well,'' he said. ''The same technological advances are making the tools of destruction deadlier, cheaper and more available, making us more vulnerable to problems that arise half a world away, to terror, to ethnic, racial and religious conflicts, to weapons of mass destruction, drug trafficking and other organized crime.''In cataloging some of the issues that he said should become part of any new discussions of national security, Mr. Clinton also touched on part of the presidential debate.Democrats have sought to portray Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, the Republican candidate, as mired in a narrow military vision of national security no longer appropriate in a post-cold-war world. That was a theme of an address delivered last month by Vice President Gore, the presumed Democratic nominee.Thus, Mr. Clinton's long remarks about global warming were a gesture of support for Mr. Gore, whose ''new security agenda'' includes global warming, and who has been criticized by Republicans who say that scientists disagree about how great a threat it is.But Mr. Clinton said that unless greenhouse gas emissions are cut, ''most scientists are convinced that storms and droughts will intensify as the globe continues to warm. Crop patterns will be disrupted, food supplies will be affected, and the seas will rise so high they will swallow islands and coastal areas.''He said that the revolution in miniaturization in commonplace items like telephones will eventually also mean that biological, chemical and even nuclear weapons will be able to be put in packages small enough to transport easily.Mr. Clinton announced $300 million in new money to help law enforcement agencies deal with new threats. Mr. Clinton disparaged critics who objected to the White House's listing the global spread of AIDS as a national security threat. Diseases like AIDS, malaria and tuberculosis, he said, ''can ruin economies and threaten the very survival  of nations and societies.''Africa now has 70 percent of the world's AIDS cases, and some employers, he said, now hire two people for each job vacancy, assuming one is going to die from the disease.''With malaria,'' the president said, ''people now discuss in common parlance, 'airport malaria,' something people can get in any international airport in any country in the world because we're all traveling around and bumping into people from other countries.''THE CHINA TRADE WRANGLE: THE CLINTON SPEECH
Stepping up his criticism of Gov. George W. Bush's proposal to let taxpayers invest some of their Social Security taxes, Vice President Al Gore told a convention of older Americans today that the plan could jeopardize the retirement benefits even of current recipients.Injecting a sense of urgency into his dire warnings about Mr. Bush's plan, Mr. Gore argued that the proposal could have an almost immediate and negative impact by destabilizing the Social Security system, weakening the economy and reducing government resources for other programs, including Medicare.Stepping up his criticism of Gov. George W. Bush's proposal to let taxpayers invest some of their Social Security taxes, Vice President Al Gore told a convention of older Americans today that the plan could jeopardize the retirement benefits even of current recipients.Injecting a sense of urgency into his dire warnings about Mr. Bush's plan, Mr. Gore argued that the proposal could have an almost immediate and negative impact by destabilizing the Social Security system, weakening the economy and reducing government resources for other programs, including Medicare.''You shouldn't be asked to play stock market roulette with your retirement savings in the Social Security program,'' Mr. Gore told several thousand people at a convention of AARP, an organization of people 50 and older. ''You shouldn't be left without retirement security if you do. And you should not have to foot the bill for others who do play and happen to lose, because some people would lose. The Bush plan raises all of these possibilities.''Mr. Gore also seized on remarks by Mr. Bush on Tuesday, when the Republican governor of Texas suggested that his proposal might be just a first step toward allowing workers to invest most or all of their payroll taxes.''What if people make poor choices?'' asked Mr. Gore, the Democratic Party's presumptive presidential nominee. ''What if the stock market dips right before an individual retires? Are individuals stuck with nothing?''Saying that Mr. Bush has not ruled out the possibility of future benefit cuts, Mr. Gore added, ''I don't think your Social Security should be up for grabs, and under my plan, it won't be.''Though Mr. Bush has not filled in many details of his proposal, its broad outline calls for allowing workers to invest in the markets part of the 12.4 percent payroll tax that finances Social Security benefits.The governor argues that allowing people to take advantage of Wall Street's historically strong returns could reduce the cost of retirement benefits and help extend the solvency of the system. Under current projections, Social Security will become insolvent by 2037, as more baby boomers retire.Mr. Gore contends that the best way to strengthen the system is to use the Social Security surplus to pay down the national debt, and then devote the interest savings to the system. The plan, he says, would not only prolong Social Security's solvency until 2054, but also keep interest rates down and sustain the economic boom.Mr. Bush argues that the Gore proposal, by failing to address Social Security's underlying problems, would inevitably lead to tax increases or benefit cuts to close future shortfalls in the system.Mr. Gore has sought to turn the Social Security debate into a broader issue of leadership style, asserting that Mr. Bush's ''irresponsible'' plan demonstrates that he would be an incompetent steward of the economy.Mr. Bush has also tried to make the debate as much about character as about policy, arguing that Mr. Gore has shown himself to lack credibility, consistency and vision on this and other issues.The Bush campaign hammered at that theme again today, releasing material from a White House Web site in which Mr. Gore is said to have supported a proposal last year by the Clinton administration to invest some Social Security money ''to achieve higher returns.''''Al Gore proposed allowing the federal government to invest in the stock market to save Social Security and now he's denying it,'' said Ari Fleischer, a spokesman for the Bush campaign.''Whether the issue is abortion, gun control, medical marijuana and now Social Security, Al Gore has a history of changing his position for political gain. That's why he has a problem with credibility.''Mr. Gore's aides contend that the administration's proposal involved less risk than Mr. Bush's. And Mr. Gore himself says he grew wary of the plan after hearing debate on it.John Rother, director of legislation and public policy for AARP, said the organization, which represents 34 million people, had not taken a position on either candidate's plan. But he said AARP would almost certainly oppose any proposal that called for allowing workers to invest all of their payroll taxes.''What privatization means to me is that the risk is shifted entirely on to the individual instead of being shared broadly,'' Mr. Rother said. ''The whole point of Social Security is that it be something you can count on, where you are not at risk.''
Following are excerpts from prepared remarks by Governor George W. Bush of Texas today before Boeing workers, as provided by the Bush campaign.From the start of this campaign, I have defined some sharp disagreements with the Clinton-Gore administration. But today I want to address an important area of agreement. A pressing question now confronts the Congress, and it will not wait until the next president takes office.Following are excerpts from prepared remarks by Governor George W. Bush of Texas today before Boeing workers, as provided by the Bush campaign.From the start of this campaign, I have defined some sharp disagreements with the Clinton-Gore administration. But today I want to address an important area of agreement. A pressing question now confronts the Congress, and it will not wait until the next president takes office.The issue is whether to extend normal trade relations to China on a permanent basis. This vote is one step in the process of drawing China into the world trading system. China is on the verge of joining the 136 members of the World Trade Organization. Congress must now decide whether the U.S. will gain the benefits of China's more open economy.The stakes are high, on all sides. For businesses, workers and farmers across our country, it will mean much lower trade barriers and enormous opportunities for U.S. exports. For the people of East Asia, it will affect their relations with the region's major power. For the people of China, it holds out the hope of more open contact with the world of freedom. In short, this will be among the most serious decisions our government will make this year.Last year, when I laid out my vision of a distinctly American internationalism, I said that we must see China clearly, not through the filters of posturing and partisanship. And today I am acting on that principle. I am here to urge all members of Congress, both Republicans and Democrats, to join together in making China a normal trading partner of the United States.I differ with the president and vice president on many issues regarding China and trade. They place their confidence in the Chinese regime as a ''strategic partner'' of the United States. I know they are a competitor. They have been inconsistent on Taiwan; I will be clear. They failed to obtain ''fast track'' trade negotiating authority. I will fight for it. They mishandled the global trade negotiations right here in Seattle. I will make expanding trade a consistent priority of my administration.Today, however, all of us who believe in a more open China -- in advancing the rule of law and trade -- must work together. This is not a Republican or Democratic concern. It is an American concern. This trade agreement is the work of 13 years and three administrations. We cannot let that work be undone.Let me explain why. There are three compelling reasons to support this agreement -- freedom, security and economics.First, trade with China will promote freedom. Freedom is not easily contained. Once a measure of economic freedom is permitted, a measure of political freedom will follow. China today is not a free society. At home, toward its own people, it can be ruthless. Abroad, toward its neighbors, it can be reckless.When I am president, China will know that America's values are always part of America's agenda. Our advocacy of human freedom is not a formality of diplomacy. It is a fundamental commitment of our country. It is the source of our confidence that Communism, in every form, has seen its day.I view free trade as an important ally in what Ronald Reagan called ''a forward strategy for freedom.'' The case for trade is not just monetary, but moral, not just a matter of commerce, but a matter of conviction. Economic freedom creates habits of liberty. And habits of liberty create expectations of democracy. There are no guarantees, but there are good examples, from Chile to Taiwan. Trade freely with China, and time is on our side. . . .Simply put: China is most free where it is most in contact with the world economy.Second, trade with China serves our own national interest, as well as the security interests of China's neighbors. China is not our ''strategic partner.'' But neither is it our enemy.As I've said before, China is a competitor, to be faced without ill will and without illusions. When I am president, China will have no doubts about our power and purpose in the region, about our strong commitment to democratic allies throughout Asia. But this is accomplished by confident diplomacy, strong alliances and the military might to back them up. It is not accomplished by hindering free trade or seeking to isolate China. . . .When both China and Taiwan are members of the W.T.O., both will need to apply global rules to their trade, including trade with one another, and the prospects for cross-straits relations should improve.Third, trade with China serves the economic interests of America. . . .The doors will open to providers of U.S. services -- the import-export trade, banking, insurance, telecommunications, accounting, computers, motion pictures and more. China will also adhere to W.T.O. rules on intellectual property rights and investments. And if Europe negotiates a better deal in these or any other areas, by the terms of the agreement we will get the same treatment. . . .It is worth making one more point, a very practical one: Defeat of this bill won't even keep China out of the W.T.O., since President Clinton has already agreed to its entry. A ''no'' vote would only prevent the U.S. from enjoying the benefits of China's market opening -- even as foreign rivals to American firms do enjoy those benefits.After last year's confusion in Seattle, a leader in the protectionist camp confidently declared that by excluding China from the W.T.O. the opponents hoped -- as he put it -- ''to deliver the last blow'' against our system of free trade. Neither the United States nor the world can afford such a setback. I believe that trade serves the deepest interests of our country and advances the hopes of the Chinese people for a freer society. Our greatest export is not food or movies or even airplanes. Our greatest export is freedom. The people of China stand ready to receive it. The demand has never been greater.
Hoping to prod Republicans on gun control,  Democrats forced a symbolic vote today on a stalled bill to combat juvenile crime after tangling up the Senate with arcane parliamentary devices for two days and unleashing pent-up acrimony between the parties.The resolution, which does not carry the weight of law, passed by a hair-thin margin of 50 to 49. It urged Republicans immediately to pass the crime bill and an accompanying amendment that would require all sellers at gun shows to conduct background checks on buyers. Both measures have been stuck in the Congressional pipeline for eight months.Hoping to prod Republicans on gun control,  Democrats forced a symbolic vote today on a stalled bill to combat juvenile crime after tangling up the Senate with arcane parliamentary devices for two days and unleashing pent-up acrimony between the parties.The resolution, which does not carry the weight of law, passed by a hair-thin margin of 50 to 49. It urged Republicans immediately to pass the crime bill and an accompanying amendment that would require all sellers at gun shows to conduct background checks on buyers. Both measures have been stuck in the Congressional pipeline for eight months.Unwilling to stay silent on the issue, Republicans offered their own resolution, which accused the Clinton administration of failing to enforce existing gun laws and defended the rights of a ''citizen to own a firearm for any legitimate purpose.'' That passed 69 to 30.Although the resolutions were pure symbolism, nothing more than for-the-record suggestions, the action today comes at a politically opportune time for Democrats, who are pushing for stricter gun control.On Sunday, hundreds of thousands of people rallied on the Mall to voice support for gun control and, in a sign that the issue remains potent on the campaign trail, Gov. George W. Bush sought last week to fend off criticism that he is soft on guns by announcing a plan to provide trigger locks to gun owners in Texas.Sensing vulnerability, Republicans are reluctant to face another vote, no matter how symbolic, on gun control.The real war of words today took place immediately after the votes, when a fuming Senator Trent Lott of  Mississippi, the majority leader, attacked Democrats for accusing him of trying to stifle debate and for what he said was deliberately trying to thwart his efforts to move important appropriations bills.Mr. Lott said Democrats clogged up the Senate with countless unrelated measures and then ''they criticize us for not getting the work done.'' He added, sputtering with anger, ''That's smart, real smart.''Senator Tom Daschle of South Dakota, the Democratic leader, was able to force the gun issue to the Senate floor by using a loophole in new Senate rules. Republicans voted to close that loophole today.After Mr. Lott spoke, Mr. Daschle said Democrats were relegated to using parliamentary maneuvers to talk about gun control and other issues because they had no choice.Then, arms flailing, he accused Senator Lott of carrying out ''a version of dictatorship on the Senate floor'' and running the Senate, where debate is deliberately long and loosely structured, as if it were the House. Senator Lott's real motive, he said, was keeping politically difficult issues from coming to the floor.''The way the Senate is being run is wrong,'' Mr. Daschle said. ''No majority leader in history has attempted to constrain Senate debate as aggressively as Senator Lott has attempted to do. He is trying to protect his members so they don't have to vote on tough issues.''Mr. Daschle also threatened to make future trouble for Mr. Lott by further slowing Senate proceedings if the majority leader did not permit Democrats more leeway.The Senate passed the crime bill last May, with Vice President Al Gore casting a tie-breaking vote on the gun show amendment. But the the House passed a crime bill that  left out the gun show measure.
Americans have little sense of power over the presidential nominating process, with only a fifth of them saying primary voters selected Gov. George W. Bush of Texas and Vice President Al Gore as the candidates for president, the latest New York Times/CBS News Poll shows.A vast majority of the 947 adults interviewed last week said they would prefer a single national primary to the present system, which they said confers too much influence to states holding early presidential primaries. Seventy-five percent favored a national primary, while 20 percent said the present system was preferable.Americans have little sense of power over the presidential nominating process, with only a fifth of them saying primary voters selected Gov. George W. Bush of Texas and Vice President Al Gore as the candidates for president, the latest New York Times/CBS News Poll shows.A vast majority of the 947 adults interviewed last week said they would prefer a single national primary to the present system, which they said confers too much influence to states holding early presidential primaries. Seventy-five percent favored a national primary, while 20 percent said the present system was preferable.Nearly three-fifths of the public called the presidential campaign dull, rather than interesting. Republicans, perhaps because three-fourths of them expect to win the White House in November, were less critical. They divided evenly on the question.But overall interest in the campaign has dropped sharply in the two months since the nominations of the two major parties were decided. Only 15 percent of those surveyed said they had discussed the campaign in the previous day. In mid-March, 49 percent told pollsters for Harvard's Joan Shorenstein Center on the Press, Politics and Public Policy that they had talked about the campaign that day.While respondents agreed that voters had little influence over either party's choice, they had different explanations of who made the Republican and Democratic decisions. For Mr. Bush, the public thought campaign money was most important, while for Mr. Gore, they said it was the support of party leaders. Both judgments reflected the attention those factors drew during the nomination contests.While 21 percent said the voters had the most influence in picking Mr. Bush, 26 percent said party leaders were decisive, and 44 percent credited his success to ''people who contributed money.''Concerning Mr. Gore, 20 percent said the voters were decisive for his candidacy, while 48 percent said party leaders had the most say and 24 percent said contributors held the most influence.The telephone poll had a margin of sampling error of plus or minus three percentage points.The public support for a national primary in the poll, which was conducted from May 10 through May 13, was not unusual. The Gallup Poll has found comparable majorities for the idea since the 1950's.Respondents who were asked to discuss their reasons for supporting a national primary generally contended that it would make the process shorter, neater and, surprisingly, cleaner.Annette Scott, a nurse's assistant from Miami who is a Democrat, said,  ''A single primary day would eliminate the money spent digging up dirt on each other.''Glenda Tager, a homemaker in Lexington, S.C., who is a Republican, said, ''With one day, they would spend less money, and people wouldn't have to listen to so much negative campaigning.''But the depth of the support for the concept was not tested because the poll did not pose the arguments against such a plan that wouid be raised if the parties or Congress seriously considered a national primary.Thomas Mann, a senior fellow at the Brookings Institution, said yesterday that politicians and academics are generally hostile to a one-day national primary because they say it would require tremendous resources available only to a candidate already perceived as a front-runner.And, he said, ''It removes any real opportunity for a sequential testing for the candidates and a learning process for the voters.''Republican leaders are considering a third option, with small states voting first and the biggest states holding their primaries last. They argue that this is the only way to forestall the national primary they see developing as states seek political influence by seizing the earliest possible dates.But this plan, which was also presented to respondents without arguments pro or con, did not impress those surveyed. Thirty-six percent said it would be better than the present system, but 49 percent said it would be worse.About half of those surveyed said they were satisfied with the candidates who emerged, while half said they wanted more choices. People who said they would vote for Mr. Bush were slightly more content; 58 percent of them said they were satisfied with the choices now, compared with 52 percent of Mr. Gore's supporters.Some questions tapped, quite deeply, into traditional reservoirs of hostility or at least skepticism about the electoral system.For example, 33 percent agreed with the statement: ''It makes no real difference who is elected president -- things go on as they did before.'' Similar findings were typical in 1996. But 20 years earlier, in 1976, only 19 percent agreed.Similarly, 64 percent of those surveyed said that people like themselves had ''not much'' to say about what government does. Since the Times/CBS News Poll first asked the question in 1990, only once did it draw a higher response. And in February, at the peak of the primary season, just 48 percent expressed that sense of powerlessness.The dismay came through in some  follow-up interviews. Jane Marawar, a homemaker in Austin, Tex., said, ''It's important to vote, but money seems to be running the election process.'' Mrs. Marawar, a Democrat, said she did not vote in the Texas primary on March 14, a week after Mr. Gore was credited with wrapping up the nomination. By then, she said, ''the die was cast.''''People think 'the nomination is already decided, why should I bother, why should I get involved?' '' she said.Ms. Scott, the Miami Democrat, said: ''I didn't feel I had much of a say. It just seems whomever the party sent out, we were expected to accept. It wasn't as if there were a variety of people to choose from. It just seems like the candidate was prepackaged, endorsed by the party and that's the way it is, take it or leave it.''
THE REFORM PARTYBUCHANAN RESIGNATION SOUGHT  Reform Party leaders in Colorado and Georgia have called on Pat Buchanan, the leading contender for the Reform presidential nomination, to resign from the party on the grounds that he has been spreading hate and intolerance and ignoring the party procedures. At a meeting last Saturday, the executive committee of the party in Colorado passed a resolution saying that Mr. Buchanan was ''promoting discrimination, intolerance and hatred against various groups of law-abiding American citizens.'' In addition, it condemned remarks attributed to Mr. Buchanan in which homosexuality was called a disorder. ''We just don't have any room for intolerance,'' Victor Good, the party chairman, said. The Reform Party in Georgia called for Mr. Buchanan's resignation after he invited state residents to a May 21 state convention that party leaders said was scheduled illegally. Jim Mangia, secretary of the national Reform Party, predicted that more states would move against Mr. Buchanan. Bay Buchanan, Mr. Buchanan's sister and chief strategist, called the Colorado and Georgia moves ''much ado about nothing.''Irvin Molotsky (NYT)THE REFORM PARTYBUCHANAN RESIGNATION SOUGHT  Reform Party leaders in Colorado and Georgia have called on Pat Buchanan, the leading contender for the Reform presidential nomination, to resign from the party on the grounds that he has been spreading hate and intolerance and ignoring the party procedures. At a meeting last Saturday, the executive committee of the party in Colorado passed a resolution saying that Mr. Buchanan was ''promoting discrimination, intolerance and hatred against various groups of law-abiding American citizens.'' In addition, it condemned remarks attributed to Mr. Buchanan in which homosexuality was called a disorder. ''We just don't have any room for intolerance,'' Victor Good, the party chairman, said. The Reform Party in Georgia called for Mr. Buchanan's resignation after he invited state residents to a May 21 state convention that party leaders said was scheduled illegally. Jim Mangia, secretary of the national Reform Party, predicted that more states would move against Mr. Buchanan. Bay Buchanan, Mr. Buchanan's sister and chief strategist, called the Colorado and Georgia moves ''much ado about nothing.''Irvin Molotsky (NYT)THE REPUBLICANSBUSH ENDORSED AS REAGAN'S HEIR  Nancy Reagan endorsed Gov. George W. Bush of Texas for president yesterday, claiming him as an heir to the conservative political tradition of her husband, former President Ronald Reagan. ''His agenda of tax cuts, smaller government and a strong national defense will build pride in America just as it did when my husband was president,'' Mrs. Reagan said. ''This is a candidate Ronnie would be proud of.'' Mr. Reagan, 89, has Alzheimer's disease and no longer makes public appearances or statements. Mrs. Reagan has offered her endorsement of every Republican presidential candidate since her husband left office in 1988. Mr. Bush proudly embraced the Reagan mantle. ''I thank her for her endorsement and pledge an optimistic, positive campaign, in the Reagan tradition, to renew America's spirit and encourage a new era of personal responsibility and freedom,'' Mr. Bush said.James Sterngold (NYT)THE STATESTHE VOTE IS IN THE MAIL  Unable to affect the presidential nominating contests at this late point, Oregon voters used Tuesday's vote-by-mail primary, the nation's first, to reject ballot proposals calling for a new gasoline tax and limits on damages in personal-injury lawsuits. Oregon residents have voted by mail in local elections and special statewide elections since the early 1980's, but they had never before voted entirely by mail in a regularly scheduled election. A footnote: Vice President Al Gore and Mr. Bush won going away, as expected, not that it made any difference in the nominating contests. And the turnout? The secretary of state's office put it at 47 percent, the highest since the 1992 primary, when turnout hit 49.1 percent.Evelyn Nieves (NYT)THE SENATECAMPAIGN FINANCING LOOPHOLE  A bipartisan group of senators introduced legislation yesterday to close a loophole in federal tax and election law that allows nonprofit groups to raise and spend unlimited amounts of money on political campaigns with virtually no disclosure. Organizations like the Sierra Club and the Republicans for Clean Air have taken advantage of the provision, Section 527 of the Internal Revenue Code, to raise and spend millions of dollars on behalf of candidates. They can run television advertisements and conduct telephone campaigns as long as they do not explicitly advocate the election or defeat of a candidate. The proposed legislation, similar to a bill already before the House, would require that such groups register with the Federal Election Commission and comply with federal election laws. It also would require that they disclose their existence to the Internal Revenue Service and that they reveal their large contributors and expenditures. One of the sponsors of the Senate bill, Senator Joseph I. Lieberman, Democrat of Connecticut, said that passage of the measure would ''remove 527s from the shadows and expose their activities to the light of public scrutiny.'' Senator John McCain, Republican of Arizona, another sponsor and longtime advocate of campaign finance reform, called the proliferation of 527 organizations ''a pernicious evil'' that has helped bring American politics to an all-time low.John M. Broder (NYT)LIBYAN INNUENDO  With an uphill battle to keep Senator Conrad Burns, Republican of Montana, from winning a third term, Brian Schweitzer, a Democratic challenger, has found another obstacle to overcome. Mr. Schweitzer said this week that the same phone bank company that made negative calls against Senator John McCain of Arizona before the Republican presidential primary in South Carolina was making calls to Montana on behalf of Mr. Burns. Mr. Schweitzer said a Houston firm, Voter Consumer Research, asked Montana voters if they had been aware that Mr. Schweitzer had once worked in Libya, ''a known terrorist state.'' Yes, he did once work in Libya, Mr. Schweitzer said, in 1980, as an importer of American-made farm equipment for farms being worked by Americans. And if there was something wrong with that, he went on, ''whoever is paying for this dirty trick push poll needs a civics lesson.'' Well, it was not the Burns campaign, said Tricia Pearson, the campaign coordinator. ''We're not doing it,'' she said. ''We don't know anything about it.''Michael Janofsky (NYT)
Calling trade relations with China the work of ''13 years and three administrations,'' Gov. George W. Bush of Texas today urged Congressional Republicans and Democrats alike to support President Clinton and vote next week to grant China permanent trade rights.Although Mr. Bush has long favored free trade, his address here today on the vast factory floor of a Boeing plant marked one of the very few times that he has tried publicly to affect pending legislation in Congress. He called next week's House vote ''among the most serious decisions our government will make this year.'' And he said ''no one serious about shouldering the responsibilities of the Presidency'' should remain silent.Calling trade relations with China the work of ''13 years and three administrations,'' Gov. George W. Bush of Texas today urged Congressional Republicans and Democrats alike to support President Clinton and vote next week to grant China permanent trade rights.Although Mr. Bush has long favored free trade, his address here today on the vast factory floor of a Boeing plant marked one of the very few times that he has tried publicly to affect pending legislation in Congress. He called next week's House vote ''among the most serious decisions our government will make this year.'' And he said ''no one serious about shouldering the responsibilities of the Presidency'' should remain silent.''From the start of this campaign I have defined some sharp differences with the Clinton-Gore administration,'' Mr. Bush said, a sleek Boeing 777 behind him. ''But today I want to address an important area of agreement. A pressing question now confronts the Congress and it will not wait until the next president takes office.''Mr. Bush drew some sharp distinctions between himself and Vice President Al Gore on China. But he portrayed the quest for a more open China, advanced through trade and the rule of law, as one that Presidents of both parties had fought for.''This is not a Republican or Democratic concern,'' Mr. Bush said. ''It is an American concern. This trade agreement is the work of 13 years and three administrations. We cannot let that work be undone.'' He did not mention his father by name, although he was one of those Presidents. But he quoted Ronald Reagan, who called free trade ''a forward strategy for freedom.''With his remarks, Mr. Bush put himself in a tradition of bipartisan cooperation on foreign policy that has increasingly been eroded in recent years. And the speech was just the latest example of his efforts to portray himself as leader willing to reach across party lines.Only a day earlier, he parted company with Senate Republicans, criticizing a bill that would set a deadline for withdrawing American ground  troops from Kosovo.A spokesman for Mr. Bush said that he considered the Balkan withdrawal measure ''legislative overreach on powers of the presidency.''Mr. Bush made his speech in a region of the country that has been at the epicenter of the debate over trade. While Washington is oriented toward exports, nearby Seattle was also the site of last year's violent protests against the World Trade Organization.The vast Boeing plant itself showcased those divisions. The company is the nation's largest exporter, but a number of its workers said they feared China's entry into the World Trade Organization would ultimately cost Americans jobs. Indeed the area's Congressman, Representative Jack Metcalf is one of the few Republicans who are undecided on the issue. Mr. Bush, on his campaign plane this afternoon, said that he had made no telephone calls to wavering house members, but would do so if Representative Tom DeLay, the majority whip, asked for his help.The state of Washington has voted Democratic in the last three presidential elections, but Mr. Bush's aides say they are contesting the state. The employees at the Boeing plant gave Mr. Bush a generally polite reception. He drew applause and a few boos. A long line of workers waited to meet him and shake his hand after the speech.The measure cleared the House Ways and Means Committee today by a larger-than-expected margin of 34 to 4 as several undecided members sided with President Clinton. The full House, which is bitterly divided on the issue, is to vote next week on whether to grant China permanent normal trading privileges.President Clinton, who has made this one of his foreign-policy priorities for the year, argues that Congress must grant China permanent trading rights or risk hurting the competitiveness of American companies and relations with the world's most populous country.Still the vote is too close to call. And if the measure passes it will do so largely with the support of Republicans. Many Democrats have sided with organized labor, which is fighting hard against the measure, arguing that it would leave Congress few ways to press China to improve its record on human rights, labor and the environment.Mr. Gore has supported the bill, but has been less fervent than the President, trying to avoid the wrath of organized labor, a critical Democratic constituency.In fact, today Mr. Bush seemed a more enthusiastic ally to Mr. Clinton on the China bill than did Mr. Gore.  Saying that ''the stakes are high,'' he argued passionately for the House to approve China's entry into the World Trade Organization.''For businesses and workers and farmers it will mean lower trade barriers and important opportunities for U.S. exports and more work and jobs for United States workers,'' he said. ''For the people of East Asia, it will affect their relations with the region's major superpower. For the people of China it holds out the hope of more open contact with the world of freedom.''He did, however, use the occasion to draw distinctions between the Administration's approach to China and trade and his own. He said Mr. Clinton and Mr. Gore view China as a ''strategic partner'' and said, ''I view China as a competitor.''Mr. Bush also accused the administration of being inconsistent in its approach to Taiwan. And he charged that it had bungled various high- profile battles over trade. ''They failed to obtain 'fast track' trade negotiating authority,'' Mr. Bush said, ''I will fight for it.''Mr. Bush said that while China is not a ''strategic partner,'' it is not an enemy. ''When I am the President China will have no doubts about our power and purpose in the region -- about our strong commitment to democratic allies throughout Asia,'' he said.''But this is accomplished through confident diplomacy, strong alliances, and a military to back us. It is not accomplished by hindering free trade or seeking to isolate China.''Boeing workers were divided on the issue. Before Mr. Bush spoke Jon J. Walker, 46, a tool maker, said he opposed normal trade with China because it would result in the loss of American manufacturing jobs. ''We know that labor is cheaper elsewhere,'' he said. ''We can't compete with somebody who's living in a  cardboard box.'' He said he was a Democrat who would vote for Mr. Gore.Afterward, Charles Webb, 42, a mechanic, said that he was a unionized worker who does not ''follow the union line.'' But he said he was uncertain about China trade because ''I'm not confident with China's human rights record.'' He took a dim view of both candidates. ''I'm not going to vote for Gore -- that's a definite,'' Mr. Webb said. ''Vote for Mr. Bush? I'd prefer not to. But that may be my only choice.''THE CHINA TRADE WRANGLE: THE BUSH SPEECH
Defending its plan to break up the Microsoft Corporation, the government filed documents with a federal judge tonight that disparaged Microsoft's alternative proposal as ''a cosmetic remedy that would have virtually no competitive significance.''The brief, from the Justice Department and 17 state attorneys general, is the last written filing in the case before penalty hearings begin on Wednesday. It is a response to the brief Microsoft filed last week, in which the company proposed several narrow restrictions on its conduct that it said would be more appropriate penalties than breaking up the company.Defending its plan to break up the Microsoft Corporation, the government filed documents with a federal judge tonight that disparaged Microsoft's alternative proposal as ''a cosmetic remedy that would have virtually no competitive significance.''The brief, from the Justice Department and 17 state attorneys general, is the last written filing in the case before penalty hearings begin on Wednesday. It is a response to the brief Microsoft filed last week, in which the company proposed several narrow restrictions on its conduct that it said would be more appropriate penalties than breaking up the company.But the government's brief said that Microsoft's proposal ''does not address some of the most important violations found by the court,'' including a declaration that the company had illegally linked its Web browser to the Windows operating system.The document also belittled Microsoft's contention that interaction between its product groups was crucial for continued innovation. It cited several recent instances when company leaders, including its co-founder and chairman, William H. Gates, said the opposite -- that clear divisions between groups was important for the company's success.In response, Microsoft said, ''The government filing is long on rhetoric but short on economic analysis or factual support for its overreaching proposals.''On April 3, United States District Judge Thomas Penfield Jackson ruled that Microsoft was in wide violation of federal and state antitrust laws, and a few days later he told lawyers for both sides that he wanted to complete the penalty phase of the case quickly -- preferably within 60 days.Then, on April 20, the federal and state governments proposed breaking Microsoft in two and imposing restrictions on the company's conduct while the breakup was being carried out. Two states, Illinois and Ohio, declined to go along with the others, saying a breakup was too extreme a remedy.Under the government plan, one company would hold the Windows operating system and the other would group everything else, including the Office package of applications programs that includes Word and the spreadsheet program Excel.In its brief last week, Microsoft denounced the idea of a breakup and said that ''cross-pollination between engineers working on different products such as Windows and Office has led to numerous innovations.''But today's government brief says, ''The story Microsoft now tells of dependency between the operating systems and applications is, at the very least, greatly exaggerated.'' It goes on to quote company leaders who appear to support that assertion.In an e-mail message last year in which two company executives, Ben Slivka and Brad Silverberg, were discussing a forthcoming corporate reorganization, Mr. Silverberg wrote that Steven A. Ballmer, Microsoft's president, ''needs to do something so that the company ends up with an organization that essentially is a separate company within the company.''''It has to be free to do what it thinks best'' he continued, because ''the company is so wrapped up in its shorts that it can't get anything done.''The brief also quotes from a 1996 book ''Microsoft Secrets'' by Michael A. Cusumano and Richard W. Shelby, saying, ''Bill Gates insisted to us that Microsoft's 'dominant organizational theme is by products,' '' adding that Mr. Gates wanted ''product architectures that reduce interdependencies among teams.''The brief also quotes from another 1996 book, ''The Microsoft Way'' by Randall E. Stross, in which managers are quoted as saying, ''Whenever they studied the patterns of actual face-to-face communications'' between developer groups, ''they invariably discovered that developers never seemed to venture more than a few feet from their own offices. The daily cross-fertilization of ideas among groups was not evident.''In an online column the same year, quoted in the brief, Mr. Gates wrote: ''I gain confidence about a potential reorganization when I see that it makes clear what every group is supposed to do'' and ''minimizes the dependencies and overlap between groups.''Microsoft's spokesman, Mark Murray, said the government was referring to ''a handful of Microsoft statements talking about the need for clear lines of authority in an American business.'' He added that the government was ''euphomistically calling the unprecedented break up proposal merely a reorganization.''Over all, the government said, Microsoft's objections to its remedy proposal are ''unfounded and based almost entirely on tortured readings and mischaracterizations of the language of the proposed remedy.''In several places, the brief says, Microsoft objected to a portion of the government's proposed remedy while failing to mention another portion that addressed the company's concern.Microsoft, in its brief filed last week, insisted that it would need six months to prepare for penalty hearings, should the judge decide to consider the government's breakup plan.That would push the end of the trial well into the next presidential administration. And though Microsoft denies it, many analysts say they think the company hopes a Republican administration will drop the breakup idea. The presumed G.O.P. nominee, Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, has already suggested that he opposes a breakup of the company.In its brief today, the government said the penalty phase could be concluded quickly, and called Microsoft's proposed schedule ''a transparent effort to delay the determination and implementation of a remedy for its illegal acts as long as possible.''The brief does not offer a specific alternate timetable, but government officials have said the remedy phase could be completed within a few weeks and the company's request ''for substantial delays should be denied.''
Congressional investigators say thousands of employers are violating a federal law that requires the level of insurance coverage for mental illness to be similar to that for physical illness.And even those that are in technical compliance with the law have in  most cases found ways to skirt its intent, the investigators said.As a result, they said, the 1996 law  does not appear to have increased access to mental health services as Congress intended.Congressional investigators say thousands of employers are violating a federal law that requires the level of insurance coverage for mental illness to be similar to that for physical illness.And even those that are in technical compliance with the law have in  most cases found ways to skirt its intent, the investigators said.As a result, they said, the 1996 law  does not appear to have increased access to mental health services as Congress intended.The investigators, from the General Accounting Office, will present their findings on Thursday at a Senate hearing requested by lawmakers hoping to expand the law.Under the statute, the Mental Health Parity Act, group health plans may not set annual or lifetime dollar limits on a person's mental health care that are lower than the limits for general medical and surgical services.The General Accounting Office surveyed employers in 26 states and found that 14 percent were not complying with the federal standards. Most of those companies, by their own account, had lifetime limits on mental health benefits of $100,000 or less, but set higher ceilings for medical and surgical benefits.The G.A.O. estimated that 9,000 to 13,000 employers in the 26 states were violating the federal standards, but it did not identify them.Employees and their dependents in those states ''have often seen only minor changes in their health benefits, resulting in little or no increase in their access to mental health services,'' the report said.The accounting office said it ''did not find significant differences in the rate of employer noncompliance based on characteristics such as employer size, industry or geographic region, or whether the plan was fully insured or self-funded.''The law does not apply to health plans sponsored by an employer with 50 or fewer employees. It does apply to employers that serve as their own insurers, paying claims from company assets, as well as to companies that buy health insurance.Until now, lawmakers have not had authoritative data showing the level of noncompliance. Their current focus, on broadening the law, is aimed at a related matter on which  they have amassed a great deal of anecdotal evidence: even employers that comply with the law find ways to restrict access to mental health care, by setting limits on the number of office visits or days of hospital care, as opposed to the dollar limits that the law governs.By such techniques, the report said, most health plans that comply with the law -- 87 percent -- ''restrict mental health benefits to a greater extent than medical and surgical benefits.''''Some employers seem to be living up to the letter of the law, but not its spirit,'' said Senator James M. Jeffords, Republican of Vermont. ''I believe these practices will have to be examined in more detail as we proceed with reauthorization of the Mental Health Parity Act.''The law expires on Sept. 30, 2001. The Senate hearing on Thursday is being held by the Committee on Health, Education, Labor and Pensions, which Mr. Jeffords heads.The authors of the 1996 law, Senators Pete V. Domenici, Republican of New Mexico, and Paul Wellstone, Democrat of Minnesota, cited the findings to support their contention that Congress should broaden the law to prohibit all disparities in coverage for mental and physical ailments. Such a ban would be ''a major step toward ending the persistent discrimination against people who suffer from mental illness,'' Mr. Wellstone said.Tipper Gore, wife of the vice president, has advocated ''full parity'' in insurance coverage, and Mr. Gore sometimes promotes the idea in presidential campaign speeches.In testimony prepared for the hearing, Dr. Steven E. Hyman, director of the National Institute of Mental Health, says there is ''no reason based on biomedical or behavioral science why mental disorders should be treated differently from any other medical disorder.''There is, Dr. Hyman said, no scientific reason that a plan should cover Parkinson's disease but not schizophrenia, for both are ''chronic and not yet curable diseases that affect dopamine systems in the brain.''The General Accounting Office said the law had had ''a negligible effect'' on health insurance costs. A more comprehensive law requiring full parity could lead to ''cost increases of about 2 percent to 4 percent,'' it said.E. Neil Trautwein, director of employment policy at the National Association of Manufacturers, said, ''To the extent that an employer is not in compliance, it may be because of confusion over the application of the law or perhaps a continued struggle to hold health cost increases in check.''James A. Klein, president of the Association of Private Pension and Welfare Plans, a group composed mainly of Fortune 500 companies, said he was surprised to hear that some companies were not complying. ''I don't have any evidence to dispute that,'' Mr. Klein said, ''but our members tend to have very high compliance, because they track these requirements closely.''
Talk about mixed signals.George W. Bush's top economic adviser, Lawrence Lindsey, has been warning for some time that the stock market is dangerously overvalued, that it's a bubble that is bound to burst, and more likely sooner than later.Talk about mixed signals.George W. Bush's top economic adviser, Lawrence Lindsey, has been warning for some time that the stock market is dangerously overvalued, that it's a bubble that is bound to burst, and more likely sooner than later.Mr. Lindsey, who strongly favors Mr. Bush's proposed $1.3 trillion tax cut and argues that it would provide a needed economic stimulus, has warned his private clients of a potential stock market tailspin that could lead to a recession. He said he sold his own stocks about two years ago so he would be able ''to sleep at night.''That's one signal.The other signal came Monday when Mr. Bush told the nation that the key to saving Social Security retirement benefits was to allow working Americans to invest a portion of their Social Security taxes in the very same stock market that Mr. Lindsey, at the moment, wants no part of.Deciphering this can get confusing. It's as difficult in its way as picking winners in the market, or figuring the odds at the craps table in Atlantic City or Vegas. Do you feel lucky?''What Bush is doing is taking a guaranteed system that is indexed to inflation and shifting a portion of those benefits to a non-guaranteed, non-indexed system that's based on the luck of the stock market,'' said Roger Hickey, co-director of the Campaign for America's Future, a progressive policy organization in Washington.Even if Mr. Bush's bet is right -- that over the next several years the stock market will do better than most other investments -- there will still be many unfortunate wage earners finding themselves at retirement time on the wrong end of this big policy stick.The stock market, by definition, has winners and losers, even in the best of times. ''You could have pretty good returns in the market on average,'' said Mr. Hickey, ''but with a large number of individuals doing very poorly.''You could also have two people working side by side, making the same money in a job, and then one retires at a time the stock market is flush and the other retires a couple of years later when the stock market is crashing and people are losing their shirts.''There is, however, a group of guaranteed winners under Mr. Bush's plan -- the movers and shakers at the big brokerage houses who have been funneling many millions of dollars into the campaign coffers of Mr. Bush and other politicians, just begging them to steer some of the hundreds of billions of dollars in Social Security taxes their way.Everyone who sells stocks or mutual funds stands to benefit from this welfare scheme for the not-so-idle rich.Face it, the Republicans have had it in for Social Security since its inception. The historian William Manchester wrote about the G.O.P.'s desperate efforts in 1936 to block its creation: ''On radio spots, actors hired by the Republican National Committee revealed in shocked tones that each man would be given a number -- as though there were any other way to keep track of Social Security accounts -- and perpetrated the hoax that people would be fingerprinted.''When the Republicans won control of Congress in 1946, party leaders called for the repeal of Social Security. And nearly four decades later, Governor Bush's fellow Texan, Senator Phil Gramm, could be quoted as follows on the question of eliminating minimum benefits for the elderly:''They are 80-year-olds. Most people don't have the luxury of living to be 80 years old, so it's hard for me to feel sorry for them.''Governor Bush is trying to be a new kind of Republican, a new kind of conservative, a man who masks his party's traditionally harsh policies with a winning smile. Oh, he's a charmer.But look closely at what he is saying: ''First, we must not change Social Security for those now retired or nearing retirement. Let me put this plainly. For those on Social Security or close to receiving it, nothing will change. Government has made a commitment, and you have made your plans. These promises will be honored.''So those who are retired, or close to being retired, are safe. The rest of you, as far as I can tell, should look out.
Committees in the House and the Senate  overwhelmingly endorsed the Clinton administration's China trade bill today, contributing to a growing sense among its backers that the ardently contested measure is headed for passage.The bill, which would permanently grant China normal trading privileges, also got a plug today from Gov. George W. Bush, the presumptive Republican presidential nominee, who renewed his call on lawmakers to set aside partisan differences and back the measure.Committees in the House and the Senate  overwhelmingly endorsed the Clinton administration's China trade bill today, contributing to a growing sense among its backers that the ardently contested measure is headed for passage.The bill, which would permanently grant China normal trading privileges, also got a plug today from Gov. George W. Bush, the presumptive Republican presidential nominee, who renewed his call on lawmakers to set aside partisan differences and back the measure.President Clinton, speaking at the  United States Coast Guard Academy, warned lawmakers that rejecting the China bill ''invites a future of dangerous confrontation and constant insecurity.''In Congress, half a dozen previously uncommitted House Republicans and Democrats announced today that they would support the legislation, a necessary step for American companies to benefit fully from a deal reached by the United States and China that paves China's way into the World Trade Organization.Administration officials and congressional backers of the measure said they believed that they might be close to the 218 votes needed for passage in the House when the bill comes to a vote next week, though they continued their heated campaign for votes.''At this point we're looking for insurance votes,'' an administration official said. But the United States trade representative, Charlene Barshefsky, said, ''The situation is still fluid.''In the House Ways and Means Committee today, four previously undeclared Democrats joined an overwhelming vote, 34 to 4, in favor of the measure. Earlier in the day, the Senate Finance Committee approved the legislation, 18 to 1. Both committees have jurisdiction over trade bills, and supporters of the China bill hailed the lopsided results for building momentum toward next week's House vote.Ms. Barshefsky, Commerce Secretary William M. Daley and other administration officials continued to buttonhole wavering members of Congress today.White House officials also said they planned to seek air time from the major television networks to allow Mr. Clinton to address the nation on Sunday night about the China bill's importance, not only for American farmers, high-tech companies and manufacturers, but also for the country's long-term security. Officials at CBS, ABC and NBC said tonight that they had not yet received the request by the White House.In Congress, critics of the measure played down the committee votes as preordained, and insisted their campaign to focus on Beijing's poor record on human rights, religious freedom, environmental standards and earlier trade accords, was working.''As Americans, we value trade, but we will never trade in our values,'' said Representative David E. Bonior of Michigan, the measure's chief Democratic opponent.Labor leaders said they would step up their lobbying of fence-sitters during the last weekend before the vote.  Opponents cited reports from an official Chinese newspaper today that threatened war with Taiwan if its president-elect, Chen Shui-bian, did not commit to a ''one-China'' policy in his inaugural speech this weekend.A senior administration official said this week that ''we're very worried about the weekend'' because the Chinese ''have a long record of saying just the wrong thing, or doing something stupid, at the last moment.''But today was a day for the China measure's supporters to cheer.To attract Democrats with heavy union constituencies, the Ways and Means Committee amended its bill by including a provision of the final trade accord negotiated in November to protect American industries from a surge in imports from China.The legislation would allow the International Trade Commission, and then the president, to halt the import of Chinese goods -- from steel to computers to a range of other products -- if they are being shipped into the United States ''in such increased quantities or under such conditions as to cause or threaten to cause market disruption to the domestic producers of like or directly competitive products.''That provision, coupled with the endorsement by the committee's ranking Democrat, Charles B. Rangel of New York, seemed to provide the final push for four Democrats who had been undecided to vote for the bill: Richard E. Neal of Massachusetts, Karen L. Thurman of Florida, Lloyd Doggett of Texas and Benjamin L. Cardin of Maryland.But the new provision may also plant the seeds of new American tensions with China. The definition of what constitutes a ''surge'' of imports is always a matter of dispute, and China would almost certainly take any American efforts to limit its imports to the court of the World Trade Organization for adjudication. Because it is not a W.T.O. member now, it has not been able to challenge such rulings, including a recent one blocking imports of Chinese steel.Ms. Barshefsky said today that she was not worried about such challenges. ''The Chinese know what they agreed to in November,'' she said, ''and they understood we had to have the ability to stop import surges.''If the bill is approved, it will end the need for annual renewal of China's trade status by Congress, an event that prompted heated debate over the country's human rights record and its threats against Taiwan. Every year Congress approved the trade status, even after the Tiananmen Square killings in 1989. But opponents say that by dropping the linkage between how China treats dissidents and its ability to trade with America, Congress will be giving up leverage over Beijing.To appease some of the opponents, Democrats and Republicans are completing plans for a permanent commission that will review China's human rights record annually. But labor unions and other opponents say the commission would be toothless because it only has the power to make public its findings, something the State Department does anyway in its annual human rights report.In addition to winning over some wavering Democrats, the White House picked up the support of three uncommitted Republicans: Rick Hill of Montana, Tillie Fowler of Florida and Henry J. Hyde of Illinois.Some vote-counters had already included Mr. Hill and Mrs. Fowler in their tallies, but Mr. Hyde was a coup because he has consistently voted against upgrading China's trade status in the annual review. All the Democrats from Illinois are voting against the bill, despite heavy lobbying from Ms. Barshefsky and Secretary Daley, both Chicago natives.Administration officials and their Congressional allies said they now might be less than 10 votes shy of the 218 needed for passage in the House. Republicans are expected to provide at least 150 of those votes, although two administration officials predicted today that they would get more.Democratic supporters, while upbeat that they could win 70 votes from their ranks, still voiced caution, especially after a few unexpected defections this week, like that of Representative Bob Clement of Tennessee.''We're not there yet,'' said Representative Robert T. Matsui of California, a chief Democratic vote-counter for the bill. ''It's getting harder and harder.''Indeed, two-thirds of 211 House Democrats are likely to vote against the measure, but Democratic critics of China's record on human rights, worker standards and environmental protections were vastly outnumbered in the pro-trade Ways and Means Committee today.Only four of the panel's 16 Democrats voted against the measure: Pete Stark of California, William J. Coyne of Pennsylvania, John Lewis of Georgia and Gerald D. Kleczka of Wisconsin. A fifth Democratic foe, Michael R. McNulty of New York, was absent for the vote.''It's not that I don't want to trade with China,'' Mr. Kleczka said, ''but I don't want to fling open the doors of this country and never have a review again.''In the Senate Finance Committee's vote today, all members except Senator James M. Jeffords, Republican of Vermont, voted for the bill. Mr. Jeffords said he was protesting the imprisonment of Ngawang Choepel, a Tibetan musicologist and former Fulbright scholar at Middlebury College in Vermont.Another critic of China, Senator Fred Thompson, Republican of Tennessee, voted for the trade bill, but also introduced a separate bill to monitor Beijing's sales of missile technology and other advanced weaponry to third countries.THE CHINA TRADE WRANGLE: THE OVERVIEW
INTERNATIONALA3-152 Panels in Congress Give Backing to China Trade Bill  Committees in the House and the Senate overwhelmingly endorsed the administration's China trade bill, contributing to a growing sense among its backers that the measure was headed for passage. Half a dozen previously uncommitted House Republicans and Democrats announced their support for the legislation, which would permanently grant China normal trading privileges.A1Gov. George W. Bush, calling trade relations with China the work of ''13 years and three administrations,'' urged Republicans and Democrats alike to support President Clinton and vote for the bill next week.A1INTERNATIONALA3-152 Panels in Congress Give Backing to China Trade Bill  Committees in the House and the Senate overwhelmingly endorsed the administration's China trade bill, contributing to a growing sense among its backers that the measure was headed for passage. Half a dozen previously uncommitted House Republicans and Democrats announced their support for the legislation, which would permanently grant China normal trading privileges.A1Gov. George W. Bush, calling trade relations with China the work of ''13 years and three administrations,'' urged Republicans and Democrats alike to support President Clinton and vote for the bill next week.A1Clinton on National Security  President Clinton told the graduating class of the United States Coast Guard Academy that the world was becoming more dangerous, with new threats from disease, terrorism and even global warming.A15Sierra Leone Rebel Captured  Foday Sankoh, who vanished nine days ago after dealing humiliating blows to the United Nations peacekeeping force in Sierra Leone, was captured in Freetown, outside his abandoned house. United Nations and British officials said he was in the custody of Sierra Leone's government and was being protected by British paratroopers. The United Nations is trying to negotiate the release of 270 peacekeepers held hostage by Mr. Sankoh's group.A1Discussions began at the United Nations on whether legal options exist to bring Mr. Sankoh to justice, because no international tribunal has automatic jurisdiction over him.A6Ethiopia Pushes into Eritrea  Ethiopia's drive into Eritrea intensified as dozens of tanks and thousands of troops streamed north to join a battle for control of the area around the strategic town of Barentu.A6Belgrade TV Station Seized  The government seized control of the main opposition television station, accusing it of advocating an uprising. Taken by surprise, opposition politicians talked of the beginning of an outright dictatorship under President Slobodan Milosevic and called an immediate protest rally; 20,000 people took to the streets.A12Dominican Republic Results  The electoral council said Hipolito Mejia of the left-leaning Dominican Revolutionary Party had won 49.85 percent of the vote, with 99 percent of the ballots counted. Earlier, Mr. Mejia declared himself the winner of Tuesday's presidential election.A3Minister Denies Bribery Charge  Finance Minister Kiichi Miyazawa of Japan denied charges that when he was prime minister he bribed a politician for his silence. The politician, Kishiro Nakamura, who was construction minister from 1992 to 1993, testified against Mr. Miyazawa on Monday.A9World BriefingA10NATIONALA16-292 With Klan Ties Charged In 1963 Church Bombing  Thomas E. Blanton Jr., 61, and Bobby Frank Cherry, 69, two longtime suspects in the bombing that killed four black girls at the 16th Street Baptist Church in Birmingham, Ala., were indicted on murder charges.A1Trends in Domestic Violence  A Justice Department study showed a big drop in domestic murders, particularly the killings of black men by their black female partners, which fell 74 percent over the last two decades. But the number of white women killed by their husbands and boyfriends rose slightly.A16Employers Faulted on Coverage  Congressional investigators say thousands of employers are violating a federal law that requires similar levels of insurance coverage for mental and physical illnesses.A26Fire's Risk Underestimated  A National Park Service plan for igniting what has become the largest fire in New Mexico history foresaw ''moderate'' risk that the prescribed blaze would go beyond its limits.A20Missile System Faulted  An M.I.T. professor, Theodore A. Postol, said there is a major flaw in the Pentagon's antimissile plan and urged the White House to investigate what he said was a cover-up.A22Decline in Draft Registration  The government said 88 percent of young men now register for the draft at age 18, as required by law. The last draftee was inducted in 1973, and the highest level of registration since then was 97.7 percent, in 1991.A18Espionage Trial in Miami  Opening statements were made in the trial of an immigration official, Mariano Faget, who is accused of leaking classified information.A19Gore's Warning to Retirees  Vice President Al Gore told a convention of older people that Gov. George W. Bush's plan to let workers invest some of their Social Security taxes could jeopardize retirement benefits of current recipients.A26Sentiment for One Big Primary  Americans would prefer a single national primary to the present system, which they feel gives too much influence to early states, a New York Times/CBS News Poll found.A26SCIENCE/HEALTHAssessing Pollutant's Effect  E.P.A. scientists say in a draft report that dioxin is 10 times more likely to cause cancer than previously estimated. But some experts doubt that the report's conclusions will stand up to a review board's scrutiny.A27Diet and Hypertension  A diet low in salt and high in fruits, vegetables and low-fat dairy products was found to lower blood pressure as much as medication did.A29Treating Chronic Depression  A study indicates that a combination of antidepressants and psychotherapy works significantly better than either treatment alone.A23NEW YORK/REGIONB1-12Speaker Silver Challenged By a Fellow Democrat  The second-ranking member of the State Assembly, Michael J. Bragman, said he would try to overthrow Speaker Sheldon Silver in a vote on Monday. The speaker then removed Mr. Bragman as majority leader.A1Tape Shows Florio Reversal  Jim Florio said he had ''no difficulty'' with a limited investment of the Social Security trust fund in stocks, according to a tape recording of remarks he made a year ago. Mr. Florio has recently demonized Jon S. Corzine, his opponent for the Democratic Senate nomination in New Jersey, for supporting a ''risky scheme'' that would invest government money in the stock market.B1Restaurant Inspections, Online  The Department of Health inaugurated a Web site listing every blemish noted by inspectors at all licensed restaurants in the five boroughs.B1EDUCATIONLevy Named Chancellor  The Board of Education unanimously removed the 'interim' from Harold O. Levy's title; he is expected to be offered a two-year contract.B6Suit on Equality in Education  Civil rights groups sued California, saying the disparities between the best and worst public schools were so great as to violate the state Constitution's guarantee of a free and equal public education for all.A16SPORTSD1-8Miami Leads Knicks, 3-2  The Heat beat the Knicks, 87-81, leaving Miami one victory away from clinching their playoff series.D1A 19-Year Record Finally Falls  Susie O'Neill, a 26-year-old Australian, broke swimming's oldest record by finishing the 200-meter butterfly in 2 minutes 5.81 seconds.D4ARTSE1-12Midler vs. 'Millionaire'  Bette Midler will make her first attempt at a television series this fall with ''The Bette Show,'' a comedy that CBS will put up against ABC's ratings star, ''Who Wants to Be a Millionaire,'' on Wednesday.E10BUSINESS DAYC1-24U.S. Holding Firm on Breakup  The government defended its plan to break up Microsoft in court documents that disparaged Microsoft's alternative proposal as ''a cosmetic remedy that would have virtually no competitive significance.''C1New Chief at Mattel  Mattel hired the chief executive of Kraft Foods, Robert A. Eckert, 45, as chairman and chief executive. He succeeds Jill E. Barad, who quit in February after failing to turn around a software unit Mattel had bought.C1Dispute Over Ethics Intensifies  Fox and TheStreet.com battled over the future of a cable television program on investing in a growing dispute over the promotion of TheStreet.com's stock on the program by the company's co-founder, James J. Cramer.C1Business DigestC1OBITUARIESB13CIRCUITSG1-12HOUSE & HOMEF1-22EDITORIALA30-31Editorials: Alabama's long search for justice; the last battle of the gulf war; fresh leadership at 110 Livingston.Columns: Bob Herbert, William Safire.BridgeE5  TV ListingsE11  CrosswordE10  WeatherD8  Public LivesB2
To the Editor:Re ''Women Lose Right to Sue Attackers in Federal Court'' (front page, May 16):To the Editor:Re ''Women Lose Right to Sue Attackers in Federal Court'' (front page, May 16):On Sunday, women marched against gun violence. On Monday, the Supreme Court struck down the civil remedy provision of the Violence Against Women Act. All five majority justices were Republican appointees. No matter how many women march in Washington, one vote on the Supreme Court is worth more than a million moms.Chief Justice William H. Rehnquist has long advocated narrowing federal power, but he attained the necessary votes only in recent years. The most important thing the presidential election will decide is the composition of the court for a generation. Gov. George W. Bush, who is polling well among women voters, says he will appoint strict constructionists, like the ones who ruled against the Violence Against Women Act. If he does, no amount of legislation against violence will matter.LINDA HIRSHMAN  Waltham, Mass., May 16, 2000The writer is a professor of philosophy and women's studies at Brandeis.
LAST month Al Gore sat on a couch in the study of the Vice President's official residence and said with great urgency: ''Get in the tube, dummy! We only have a few seconds before the universe is destroyed.'' He had already made his position on the destruction of the universe clear: ''As an environmentalist, I'm against that.''Mr. Gore gives a droll reading while playing himself on the animated comedy ''Futurama,'' set in the year 3000. In Sunday's time-traveling season finale, the hero, a pizza delivery guy named Fry, has stumbled back to his original home in 1999, distorting history, creating a rip in the space-time continuum and making a final big bang imminent. Mr. Gore is trying to get Fry to re-enter the cryogenic tube that took him to the future and so save the world (not a bad thing to have on your resume if you want to be president).LAST month Al Gore sat on a couch in the study of the Vice President's official residence and said with great urgency: ''Get in the tube, dummy! We only have a few seconds before the universe is destroyed.'' He had already made his position on the destruction of the universe clear: ''As an environmentalist, I'm against that.''Mr. Gore gives a droll reading while playing himself on the animated comedy ''Futurama,'' set in the year 3000. In Sunday's time-traveling season finale, the hero, a pizza delivery guy named Fry, has stumbled back to his original home in 1999, distorting history, creating a rip in the space-time continuum and making a final big bang imminent. Mr. Gore is trying to get Fry to re-enter the cryogenic tube that took him to the future and so save the world (not a bad thing to have on your resume if you want to be president).Matt Groening, the creator of ''Futurama'' and the mastermind behind ''The Simpsons,'' recalled how the guest shot came about. He  had read that Mr. Gore was a fan of both  shows and called the vice president's staff to ask if he would be willing to play a nerd. In Sunday's episode, Mr. Gore arrives with a band he calls his Vice Presidential Action Rangers (also doing their own guest voices), including Uhura from ''Star Trek'' (Nichelle Nichols) and Stephen Hawking. ''Aren't you that physicist that invented gravity?'' Fry asks. ''Sure, why not,'' says Mr. Hawking.Who knows whether Mr. Gore's guest spot will endear him to voters besotted with pop culture, but his presence has inspired one of the wittiest episodes that this uneven year-old series has done. The Gore portion of the episode hints that a more topical spin and sharper, irreverent writing (Mr. Hawking uses his wheelchair as a lethal weapon) could make this series as funny as it should be.''Futurama'' joins a flood of season finales this weekend, with subjects ranging from a day at the beach to sexual slavery. Together, they reveal a great deal about the possibilities and limitations of network television. By the time this largely lackluster season ends on Wednesday, we'll have seen shows that define the border of network daring (''Sopranos'' envy only goes so far), as well as finales that hint at the struggles of aging dramas and the potential of still growing comedies.On tonight's finale of ''Law and Order: Special Victims Unit,'' the main plot involves a wealthy businessman (Andrew McCarthy), who keeps his wife and their young housekeeper in mental and physical slavery.But the more gripping subplot is smartly self-referential: the detectives in the show's sex-crimes unit undergo psychological testing to see how they are enduring relentless encounters with rapists and pornographers. Eliot Stabler (Christopher Meloni) is a family man; his partner, Olivia Benson (Mariska Hargitay), is a result of her mother's rape. The psychologist wonders if they or their colleagues are ready to snap (the answer creates a cliffhanger). This series raises a similar issue with viewers: how dark can a weekly series be? Though it has been a ratings success since moving to Friday, the show's premise might be called ''another week, another pedophile.'' When the series is good it is extraordinary. On last week's episode (more compelling than tonight's), a television newswoman reported that she was the recent victim of an unknown rapist; at the end, she was killed by a bomb placed in a box of flowers at her door. As taut and gripping as that episode was, the bleakness built into the series makes it hard to think about tuning in every week.Villains and VictimsThere is a difference between the darkness of ''Special Victims Unit'' (a conventional show about unmistakable heroes and villains) and the riskiness of the season's two new standouts, ''The West Wing'' and ''Judging Amy,'' terrific shows that have consistently become better. Their daring comes from the complex humanity of the characters and the ambiguity attached to the thorny political and social issues they face.Yet whether that complexity comes from the White House staff or the family court rulings of Judge Amy Gray (Amy Brenneman), both series tie things up with fluffy resolutions. President Barlett (Martin Sheen) on ''The West Wing'' marches in with his rousing ''Mr. Smith Goes to Washington'' ending; and though the heroine on ''Judging Amy'' faces hard decisions, her mother, Maxine (Tyne Daly), always knows best.The irony is that while these tacked-on endings are jarring in dramatic terms, they may also be the sops that make the shows palatable to the broadest possible audience. In the compromised landscape of network television, conventional cliffhangers and feel-good endings may buy ''Amy'' and ''West Wing'' the freedom to be tough-minded the rest of the time.Until the final minutes of each episode, these two shows are fiercely intelligent. ''The West Wing'' (which ended its season on Wednesday) has even created drama out of the hour-by-hour details of poll results. And it is especially good at the small touches that define fraught working relationships. When C. J. (Allison Janey), the press secretary, complained to Leo (John Spencer), the chief of staff, that he had not let the president know about her contribution to a discussion, he says, ''Don't do this, C. J.''Mr. Spencer's delivery subtly captures not only the condescension and sexism behind the remark, but also the extent to which those attitudes are unconscious, knee-jerk reactions in this boys' club. Though President Barlett remains a know-it-all, the character has cultivated a dry wit. The finale, in which an assassination attempt left viewers wondering who, if anyone, has been harmed, was the kind of explosive action the series rarely indulges in. Yet it worked.Next Tuesday's finale of ''Judging Amy'' explodes atypically too, with the threat of violent action. But the episode also plays to the series' great, week-after-week strengths. An innocent overheard conversation between Amy and Bruce (Richard T. Jones), her court services officer,  leads to charges of improper behavior against them. ''A white female judge and a black male C.S.O.,'' Bruce says. ''I'm surprised we lasted this long.'' What could have been lurid soap opera is handled with savvy realism here. The final episode leaves more than their professional fate hanging: Maxine has been having a romance with a wealthy businessman, whose son crudely interferes, and one of Amy's rulings may have deadly repercussions.Saying So LongOther daring series were simply in the wrong place this season. The medical drama ''Wonderland'' was canceled by ABC after two episodes, leaving a hard core of followers wondering where it went. The ratings were atrocious for a network show, but some viewers loved it. (Every television reporter, editor and critic has heard from friends and viewers who were passionate about ''Wonderland,'' which rarely happens when a show is pulled.) ''Wonderland'' might have done fine on cable, where a smaller, devoted audience is enough.Similarly, the canceled police series ''The Beat'' might have done better on a real network rather than on UPN, the wrestling netlet. The show wasn't breaking ground (and as it went along relied less on its gimmick of switching back and forth between film and video). Yet it worked as a lively version of the genre.Other new shows turned out to be less daring than they promised. ''Once and Again,'' though renewed for next season, has already petered out dramatically. Lily and Rick (Sela Ward and Billy Campbell), the divorced parents who find each other, have become tiresome and annoying. The secondary characters are much more absorbing, and the show picks up conspicuously when they become the focus: the children are believably difficult and confused; so are Lily's sister, who fell for a married man, and Rick's ex-wife, who fell for a younger man. (Maybe Rick and Lily should just run off-screen together, leaving the show in better shape.)It took ''Once and Again'' just a few months to age badly. Better series take years before those signs show, and ''The Practice'' is approaching that point. The season's best episodes came in a recent story  line in which Ellenor (Camryn Manheim) tried to save a man from death row. The least compelling elements involved the wedding of Bobby and Lindsay (Dylan McDermott and Kelli Williams). Sunday's exceptional finale displays the series' continued power, in an emotionally strong story about a woman (Marlee Matlin) on trial for shooting the man who raped and killed her 7-year-old daughter. The show's weariness is apparent in the wedding plot, which is wrapped up with a surprise that seems forced.The danger for series like ''The Practice'' became evident in a recent episode in which Eugene (Steve Harris) wonders yet again why he defends guilty lowlifes. How many times can the lawyers on ''The Practice'' ask that question? How many trials can the doctors on ''E. R.'' (which ended its season last night) endure? Do we believe that John Carter (Noah Wyle) became a drug addict because he was stabbed by a patient? Or is he just another victim of the writers' desperation?''The X-Files'' finale on Sunday (not available for preview) will not mark the end of the series or of David Duchovny's appearances, though both were possibilities. Mr. Duchovny will return for half of next season. In a turn both brilliant and obvious, aliens reportedly will abduct his character on Sunday's finale and he will be lost in space at the beginning of next season. But like ''E.R.'' and ''The Practice,'' ''The X-Files'' has outlived its best days; now if these shows become a subject of conversation, it's only for viewers to say they have gone downhill.Well, D'oh!While many dramas have aged badly, a block of finales on Sunday displays the rich long-term possibilities of well-written, irreverent comedies. ''The Simpsons'' may be a decade old, but it is still consistently among the best-written shows on television, its wit apparent in such tiny details as the phrases Bart writes as punishment on the blackboard in each week's opening credits. ''I will not make art out of dung,'' he wrote one week.Sunday's finale is a parody of VH-1's ''Behind the Music,'' which takes a backstage view of the Simpsons' dysfunctional route to sitcom stardom in ''Behind the Laughter.'' In this version of history, presented with the cliched, overwrought narration of the VH-1 series, when ''The Simpsons'' series faltered, ''Fox put the show on hiatus and replaced it with hidden-camera footage from the dressing room at Ann Taylor'' in a reality special called 'Peepin' It Real.' ''''King of the Hill'' has improved its sly, tongue-in-cheek humor about a propane salesman in Texas and his family, making the Hill family laughable without being unlikable. Sunday's finale takes them to a country music festival loaded with guest voices, including Randy Travis's. But last week's episode was funnier, with Sydney Pollack as a podiatrist who puts Peggy Hill's size 16 feet on an Internet site for foot fetishists.'Malcolm' and MichaelIt's easier to be irreverent with cartoons than live actors, but the season's best new comedy, ''Malcolm in the Middle,'' has flourished by creating a perfect balance of realism and comic exaggeration. The series quickly moved beyond the idea that Malcolm, the middle child (played with endearing mischievousness by Frankie Muniz), is a genius. The appeal of the show is that this family is typical in its shouting, squabbling and mean tricks. It even gets away with a mother (Jane Kaczmarek) who dishes out lovingly vicious punishments. On Sunday's episode, while the rest of the family goes to the beach, the youngest child, Dewey (Erik Per Sullivan), is left behind with the baby sitter (Beatrice  Arthur), who ends up doing a stellar flamenco with him.Not every finale says something about the broad television landscape, of course. The hourlong season finale of ''Spin City'' on Wednesday finds a deft way to write the indispensable Michael J. Fox out of the series. The episode could have been mawkish, because Mr. Fox chose to leave after announcing that he has Parkinson's disease. But the series has always been written with a touch of sophistication that raised it above most sitcoms. Though the final episode has moments of undeniable emotion, it relies on hard-nosed political reality to send Mr. Fox's character, the deputy mayor, out of his job and out of the series.Though Charlie Sheen will join the cast next year, playing a new character, Mr. Fox's departure is sure to transform ''Spin City'' into something different. He managed to blend an upscale aura and laserlike comic timing with a down-to-earth appeal; mixing the exceptional and the ordinary, risk and insurance, is apparently what it takes to make a network success.Before the RerunsHere is the schedule for season finales mentioned in the critic's notebook article:TONIGHT: ''Law and Order: Special Victims Unit,'' at 10 on NBC.SUNDAY: ''Futurama,'' at 7 p.m. on Fox; ''King of the Hill,'' at 7:30 p.m. on Fox; ''The Simpsons,'' at 8 p.m. on Fox; ''Malcolm in the Middle,'' at 8:30 p.m. on Fox. ''The X-Files,'' at 9 p.m. on Fox. ''The Practice,'' at 10 p.m. on ABC.TUESDAY: ''Judging Amy'' at 10 p.m. on CBS.WEDNESDAY: ''Spin City'' at 9 p.m. on ABC.CRITIC'S NOTEBOOK
To the Editor:Re ''Poll Shows Bush Ahead of Gore, With Leadership a Crucial Issue'' (front page, May 16):I was surprised to see the results of your presidential poll stating that even though the majority was more in agreement with the positions of Al Gore, they thought that George W. Bush would be the better leader.To the Editor:Re ''Poll Shows Bush Ahead of Gore, With Leadership a Crucial Issue'' (front page, May 16):I was surprised to see the results of your presidential poll stating that even though the majority was more in agreement with the positions of Al Gore, they thought that George W. Bush would be the better leader.Mr. Gore has extensive experience in the Senate and as an active vice president, and is well informed on national and foreign affairs. Mr. Bush has had limited experience as the governor of a single state.Both men have made mistakes, but it seems that when Mr. Bush makes a mistake showing a lack of knowledge or understanding, people don't take it seriously -- they sort of expect it -- yet when Mr. Gore makes a mistake (as with his interference in the case of Elian Gonzalez), he is castigated.Actually that's a compliment, as it shows we expect more of him, but it doesn't work to his advantage in this political era.RUTH KARTER  Old Westbury, N.Y., May 18, 2000
THE DEMOCRATSPITTING BROTHER AGAINST BROTHER -- Trying to foment a bit of sibling discord, the Gore campaign yesterday circulated a newspaper article by Gov. Jeb Bush of Florida that seemed to contradict a plan by his brother Gov. George W. Bush of Texas to allow taxpayers to invest some Social Security payroll taxes in the stock market. In an April 18 op-ed piece in The Tallahassee Democrat, Jeb Bush argued that, because of the stock market's volatility, the state pension system should put part of its $12 billion surplus in a fund that would be reserved for a downturn. ''It makes sense that we take the surplus we have now and place it in a reserve that is not affected by changes in the market,'' he wrote. Mr. Gore's aides said that suggested Mr. Bush wants to withdraw some pension funds from the stock market. A spokesman for Jeb Bush said the Gore campaign had misread the article.James Dao (NYT)THE REPUBLICANSTHE DEMOCRATSPITTING BROTHER AGAINST BROTHER -- Trying to foment a bit of sibling discord, the Gore campaign yesterday circulated a newspaper article by Gov. Jeb Bush of Florida that seemed to contradict a plan by his brother Gov. George W. Bush of Texas to allow taxpayers to invest some Social Security payroll taxes in the stock market. In an April 18 op-ed piece in The Tallahassee Democrat, Jeb Bush argued that, because of the stock market's volatility, the state pension system should put part of its $12 billion surplus in a fund that would be reserved for a downturn. ''It makes sense that we take the surplus we have now and place it in a reserve that is not affected by changes in the market,'' he wrote. Mr. Gore's aides said that suggested Mr. Bush wants to withdraw some pension funds from the stock market. A spokesman for Jeb Bush said the Gore campaign had misread the article.James Dao (NYT)THE REPUBLICANSSEEKING RUNNING-MATE SUGGESTIONS -- Gov. George W. Bush of Texas sent letters to 450 Republicans yesterday seeking advice on a running mate. In the three-paragraph request, which went to United States senators, representatives, governors, state Republican committee members, state party chairmen and Bush for President committees, the governor said: ''My primary concern is to select someone who is capable of serving as president of the United States. I am interested in your thoughts as to individuals whom I should consider as well as any particular issues you believe I should take into account.'' Separately, in a Fox News television interview, Mr. Bush repeated that while he opposed abortion, he would accept a running mate who favored abortion rights -- within limits. Some leaders of the religious right have said Mr. Bush risks losing support should he pick a supporter of abortion rights.(AP)THE STATESBATTLING UPHILL IN INDIANA -- With a Presbyterian church as his backdrop, David Johnson, a Democrat who serves as a policy adviser to Gov. Frank L. O'Bannon, cast himself as a champion of Hoosier values this week in beginning his campaign to unseat Senator Richard G. Lugar, a Republican seeking a fifth term. Mr. Johnson declared it was ''time we have a new senator who will put these values into action,'' as he stood outside the Indianapolis church where his father was once pastor. It will be an uphill battle for Mr. Johnson, who has raised $412,000 in contributions. Senator Lugar has amassed $2 million.Dirk Johnson (NYT)THE 2000 CAMPAIGN
With his recent statements on China trade and the deployment of American troops in Kosovo, Gov. George W. Bush has placed himself squarely in a Republican tradition of favoring internationalism and presidential supremacy in foreign policy.But the question is how much of a challenge he would face as president from his own party, which has been increasingly fractured over foreign policy in the post-cold war era between internationalists and an isolationist wing suspicious of many foreign entanglements?With his recent statements on China trade and the deployment of American troops in Kosovo, Gov. George W. Bush has placed himself squarely in a Republican tradition of favoring internationalism and presidential supremacy in foreign policy.But the question is how much of a challenge he would face as president from his own party, which has been increasingly fractured over foreign policy in the post-cold war era between internationalists and an isolationist wing suspicious of many foreign entanglements?Indeed, even though the Senate today by a vote of 53-47 shelved a measure -- opposed by President Clinton, Vice President Al Gore and Mr. Bush alike -- that could have terminated American military participation in Kosovo next July, it was mostly Democrats who ensured the provision's defeat.Only 15 of the 55 Senate Republicans heeded Mr. Bush's warnings that this was a ''legislative overreach'' that would step on the foreign policy prerogatives of the next president. Among those who voted to keep a Kosovo withdrawal deadline was the majority leader, Trent Lott.Moreover, this is not an isolated vote. Even though most Congressional Republicans are rallying behind President Clinton on granting normalized trade relations with China, legislation that Mr. Bush also supports, this is an issue of paramount importance to Republicans' business constituency.Across other areas of foreign policy, where business is less of a factor, there have been a host of occasions over the past years in which Congress has declared independence from the president on foreign policy and shown a suspicion of mutlilateral engagements. Certainly the idea -- which Mr. Bush was trying to re-establish in his statement on Kosovo -- that Congress bows to the president on foreign policy has long disappeared.In December 1998 when the United States began bombing Iraq just as the House was about to vote to impeach President Clinton, Senator Lott refused to back the military action and questioned Mr. Clinton's motives, asking whether the timing of the raids was related to the impeachment vote.Last spring, when Mr. Clinton was acting as the leader of the NATO airstrikes on Kosovo, many Republican lawmakers opposed his policy. And in the House, Representative Tom DeLay, the majority whip who is currently rounding up votes for China trade alongside Mr. Clinton, helped engineer the House defeat of a resolution endorsing the air campaign.Next came the Senate defeat last fall of the nuclear test ban treaty, followed by Senator Jesse Helms's floor proclamation this year that he would block approval of any treaties negotiated by Mr. Clinton.A key question is how much of this could come back to haunt Mr. Bush.Politically it is advantageous for him right now to look like the new Republican who is trying to rein in the excesses of Congress. In a speech last fall, he warned that the protectionist wing of his party was pursuing ''a shortcut to disaster,'' and he called for a policy of ''decidedly American internationalism.'' But as president he would have to show that he could really define and carry out such a policy.Many Republicans say that Mr. Bush would not face problems from a Republican Congress -- that many of these votes across the years have stemmed not from Republican isolationismbut from the poisonous relations between Congress and Mr. Clinton.''What this is about on the Republican side is a deep dislike and distrust for President Clinton, '' said SenatorChuck Hagel of Nebraska, one of the 15 Republicans who joined with Democrats to defeat the time limit on funds for the deployment. Mr. Hagel had reached out last week to Mr. Bush's chief foreign policy adviser, Condoleezza Rice, to alert the Bush campaign of the implications of pending Kosovo vote and find out where Mr. Bush stood.Mr. Hagel said today that he thought only eight of the Senate Republicans truly reject internationalism. ''If you have a President Bush,'' he said ''you'll find all this settle down considerably in the Republican caucus next year. There will be a new found trust and confidence that he's our guy. And if our guy says it's okay to be in Kosovo, that makes somewhat of a difference.''Moreover, Mr. Bush is more in sync with Republicans in Congress on a number of foreign policy issues. He is interested in building a robust antiballistic missile defense and like Mr. Helms has said he would rather leave it up to the next president, not Mr. Clinton, to negotiate with the Russians on the issue. He did not split with Senate Republicans when they voted down the test ban treaty last year.And when Mr. Bush called for a ''distinctly American internationalism'' in a major foreign policy speech last year, he said that while America must be involved in the world, ''that does not mean our military is the answer to every difficult foreign policy situation -- a substitute for strategy.''Ever since the Republicans took control of Congress, Democrats have often branded such views as isolationism. And the Republicans have certainly given them fodder, such as when Representative Dick Armey, the Texas Republican who is the House majority leader, once bragged about his disinterest in foreign travel. ''I've been to Europe once,'' he told reporters in the Capitol. ''I don't have to go again.''Vice President Al Gore has also wielded the isolationist label against Mr. Bush. The vice president recently accused him of being ''stuck in a cold war mindset.'' Stressing Mr. Bush's lack of foreign policy experience, Mr. Gore added, ''One has to assume that these gaps in Governor Bush's foreign policy views and experience will be filled by the ideologies and inveterate antipathies of his party -- the right-wing, partisan isolationism of the Republican Congressional leadership.''The Republicans take umbrage at such remarks. ''It is far, far from an isolationist caucus,'' Mr. Hagel said speaking of Senate Republicans.But there were signs today that some Republicans are ready to flex their muscles on foreign policy no matter who is President. ''I'm in the legislative branch and I'm protecting my prerogatives,'' said Senator Tim Hutchinson, an Arkansas Republican who voted in favor of the time limit for funding the Kosovo deployment.He said he had confidence that Mr. Bush, as president, would immediately set a time limit for disengagement in Kosovo. But if Mr. Bush did not do so, Mr. Hutchinson said, ''I think you'd see efforts to set deadlines and Congres would move to try to disengage there regardless if there's a President Gore or a President Bush.''
Social Security is slowly going broke, says Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, and the best way to avoid painful benefit cuts or tax increases is to establish private investment accounts through which workers could seek higher returns on their contributions to the retirement system.Social Security is slowly going broke, says Vice President Al Gore, and the best way to avoid painful benefit cuts or tax increases is to channel money from the federal budget surplus into the retirement system.Social Security is slowly going broke, says Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, and the best way to avoid painful benefit cuts or tax increases is to establish private investment accounts through which workers could seek higher returns on their contributions to the retirement system.Social Security is slowly going broke, says Vice President Al Gore, and the best way to avoid painful benefit cuts or tax increases is to channel money from the federal budget surplus into the retirement system.The differences between the presidential candidates are clear enough. But behind their approaches are complicated policy and political considerations regarding the problem and the possible solutions.How the System WorksBenefits to current retirees are paid out of payroll taxes levied on nearly all workers and their employers. Because the work force at the moment is large relative to the number of people who have retired, those  taxes generate more revenue than is needed to pay benefits, a surplus of about $150 billion this year and $2.3 trillion over the next 10 years.The excess revenue goes into a trust fund out of which future benefits can be paid. But the trust fund is not quite what its name implies. Rather than accumulating cash, it contains bonds issued by the federal government to the retirement system, a promise to pay back to Social Security the surplus funds when they are needed.In the meantime, the Social Security surplus goes to other purposes. For years, the government simply spent it.More recently, Congress and the Clinton administration have agreed to use the excess cash only to reduce the $3.5 trillion in national debt held by the public.The Looming ProblemThe current surplus in Social Security could turn to a deficit because of a demographic shift. Right now there are more than three workers paying taxes to support each Social Security recipient. By 2030, as the population ages and the baby boom generation retires, the ratio will shrink to 2 to 1.Under projections by Social Security's trustees, payroll taxes would no longer cover benefits starting around 2015, forcing the system to begin relying in part on the interest payments from the trillions of dollars worth of bonds in the trust fund. By around 2025, the system would have begun redeeming the bonds out of general tax revenues to cover benefit payments, and by 2037 the trust fund would be exhausted.At that point, if no changes were  made, Social Security would be able to pay less than three-quarters of promised benefits.The projections could change with the economy. Over the past few years, the date of insolvency has been pushed back to 2037 from 2029 because of economic growth that was stronger than expected.Given that the economic assumptions underlying the projections are quite conservative, defenders of the current system say the odds are strong that Social Security will weather the next three or four decades without needing any major surgery. But the leaders of both parties say it is prudent to assume there will be a financial squeeze, and to deal with it as soon as possible.Finding a SolutionPresident Clinton put an overhaul of Social Security on the table in 1998. But the two parties were unable or unwilling to reach a compromise.There are only three basic options: Cut benefits. Increase the revenues coming into the system. Or increase the rate of return on the money coming into the system.Some members of both parties have been willing to support benefit cuts as part of a package of changes. Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan, Democrat of New York, has proposed reducing cost-of-living adjustments. Representatives Jim Kolbe, Republican of Arizona, and Charles W. Stenholm, Democrat of Texas,  have proposed legislation that includes an increase in the normal retirement age, which is already rising to 67 from 65, to account for further increases in life expectancy.There has been some talk of raising or eliminating the ceiling on earnings subject to payroll taxes (currently $76,200). But most politicians have steered clear of supporting higher taxes or lower benefits.Private AccountsIn supporting private investment accounts, Mr. Bush's approach centers on increasing the return on the money coming into the system.Mr. Bush has not provided a detailed plan. But most privatization proposals call for diverting two percentage points of the 12.4 percent payroll tax into accounts that would be owned and controlled by individuals. A worker earning $50,000 a year would have $1,000 a year going to a private account.In return for the chance to invest the money themselves, workers would accept a lower guaranteed benefit from Social Security at retirement. The basic idea is that the guaranteed benefit could be reduced by more than the amount diverted into the personal accounts -- but that the returns generated for each worker by Wall Street would more than make up for the difference.The Bush campaign notes that stocks earned an average annual return, after inflation, of 7.2 percent from 1926 to 1997. By contrast, workers born after 1963 can expect on average a return from their Social Security contributions of 1.9 percent, according to Social Security statistics cited by the Bush campaign.Private accounts would provide a start on Social Security solvency  over 75 years, the standard normally used in assessing the system's health, Mr. Bush has said. He has acknowledged that other steps, like benefit cuts, would be needed to finish closing the gap, but has not said what steps he would support.Case Against the AccountsHowever strong the performance of stocks in the past, there is no assurance that they will do well in the future. And even if they do match their historical performance, there will inevitably be ups and downs along the way.People who retire and cash out their holdings in a bull market would do far better than people who have to sell while the market is depressed. And some people would no doubt make smarter investment decisions than others. Should large numbers of people lose money in the market, there would be tremendous political pressure to bail them out.Some portion of any investment gain might be eaten up by the administrative costs of maintaining the accounts. And to the degree that payroll taxes are going into private accounts rather than to pay benefits to current retirees, the government would have to put additional money into the system, presumably by using the Social Security surplus. That in turn would reduce the amount of money available for debt reduction.A diversion of two percentage points of payroll tax revenue would equal just under $1 trillion over the next decade. By not using that money for debt reduction, the government would add $300 billion to its interest bill in that period. So about $1.3 trillion of the $2.3 trillion Social Security surplus over the next 10 years would be needed to finance a private accounts plan.The Gore ApproachMr. Gore starts with the premise that the current system should be left more or less intact. His plan is built on the idea that there should be a way to use the current budget surplus to help Social Security down the road. While the basic idea may be simple, the way the government handles its finances makes executing it quite complicated.Since the Social Security system cannot keep big cash reserves of its own under the government system, the vice president wants to use all of the Social Security surplus and some of the general revenue surplus to eliminate, in 13 years, the $3.5 trillion in national debt held by the public.Eliminating the debt would leave the government better able to borrow, if necessary, later on. By putting downward pressure on interest rates, debt reduction would also stimulate economic growth, creating jobs and producing more payroll tax revenue to help keep Social Security healthy.Starting in 2011, Mr. Gore would funnel to Social Security an amount of money equal to the annual interest savings from debt reduction -- $100 billion a year at first, growing to more than $200 billion a year by 2015. Mr. Gore says the infusion would extend Social Security's solvency to 2054 from 2037 without having to cut benefits or otherwise alter the system.Case Against the Gore PlanWhile eliminating the debt would have substantial benefits, transferring the interest savings to Social Security would be little more than a paper shuffling exercise and would still leave taxpayers on the hook to pay for the shortfall in funds.Since Social Security cannot hold cash, the transfers would be in the form of government bonds that would be redeemed at some point out of general tax revenue. In that sense, Mr. Gore's plan would in essence transform Social Security into a welfare program, Senator Moynihan said. Mr. Gore's plan would do nothing to address the underlying imbalance between how much the system takes in and how much it has promised to pay in benefits.THE 2000 CAMPAIGN: RETIREMENT PLAN
Health Giant Agrees to Fine To Settle Part of Fraud Case  Columbia/HCA Healthcare, the nation's largest health care company, has agreed in principle to pay $745 million in civil penalties to resolve a portion of the government's inquiry into whether its success was achieved in part by defrauding federal health programs.Health Giant Agrees to Fine To Settle Part of Fraud Case  Columbia/HCA Healthcare, the nation's largest health care company, has agreed in principle to pay $745 million in civil penalties to resolve a portion of the government's inquiry into whether its success was achieved in part by defrauding federal health programs.If approved, the settlement would be the largest health care fraud settlement ever obtained by the Justice Department, exceeding the next highest by more than 50 percent. But the deal does not close the sprawling investigations into Columbia/HCA, some of which have lasted more than seven years. [Page A1.]Chief of JDS Uniphase Steps Down  JDS Uniphase, the component manufacturer for fiber optic equipment, said that Kevin Kalkhoven had retired as co-chairman and chief executive. Mr. Kalkhoven, 55, is succeeded by Jozef Straus, 53, who has been co-chairman, president and chief operating officer since the company was formed 18 months ago through the merger of JDS Fitel and Uniphase. Shares of JDS Uniphase fell $5.75, to $86.75. [C2.]E.P.A. Pressed 3M on Scotchgard  The Environmental Protection Agency said that it had pressed Minnesota Mining and Manufacturing to come up with a solution after the company's tests did prove that a chemical compound used in Scotchgard and other household products could pose a risk to human health and the environment. The E.P.A. account differs from that of 3M, which said that it had voluntarily decided to stop making the chemical by the end of the year. [C3.]Stocks Falter in a Technology Slump  Technology stocks slumped as investors became concerned about developments at several companies. The Nasdaq composite index fell 106.25 points, or 2.9 percent, to 3,538.71. The Standard & Poor's 500-stock index dropped 10.59 points, to 1,437.21, while the Dow Jones industrials rose 7.54 points, to 10,777.28. [C8.]MetLife Prepares to Enter Banking  For the first time since Congress eliminated barriers last fall that prevented banks and insurance companies from intermingling their businesses, a major insurance company, MetLife, said that one of its units was taking steps to go into full-service banking. [C5.]ABC to Promote Its Soap Operas  The ABC television network is introducing an ambitious advertising campaign intended to stimulate demand among consumers 16 to 24 for four of its daytime soap operas -- ''All My Children,'' ''General Hospital,'' ''One Life to Live'' and ''Port Charles.'' The ads present younger cast members from the four soaps. Each is identified with a word meant to describe the character, including the ''Rebel.'' Stuart Elliott: Advertising. [C6.]Competing Social Security Plans  Social Security is slowly going broke, Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush of Texas agree, but they differ on the solutions for fixing it. Mr. Gore would channel the benefits of the federal budget surplus into the system. Governor Bush would establish private investment accounts through which workers could seek higher returns on their contributions to the retirement system. [A23.]European Inquiry Into Coke Widens  Investigators from the European Commission raided Coca-Cola's office in Brussels as well as the office of the company's largest bottler, in London, expanding an inquiry into Coke's marketing practices that began last summer. [C4.]Dresdner Bank to Lay Off 5,000  Dresdner Bank, which abandoned a merger with Deutsche Bank last month, is expected to announce plans today for reducing its work force by 5,000 people. [C5.]
INTERNATIONALA3-15Senate Rejects Deadline For Kosovo Withdrawal  The Senate voted, 53 to 47, against a measure to set a deadline for withdrawing American troops from Kosovo. The measure was opposed by the Clinton administration and by Governor George W. Bush, although 40 Republicans voted for it.A1INTERNATIONALA3-15Senate Rejects Deadline For Kosovo Withdrawal  The Senate voted, 53 to 47, against a measure to set a deadline for withdrawing American troops from Kosovo. The measure was opposed by the Clinton administration and by Governor George W. Bush, although 40 Republicans voted for it.A1About 20,000 people gathered anew in Belgrade to protest the Serbian government's seizure of the main opposition television station, Studio B, but as they were dispersing, police officers in riot gear charged them. At least 19 people were hurt.A10Peru Challenger Pulls Out  Alejandro Toledo said he was pulling out of the May 28 runoff election for president, citing concerns about fraud. He asked President Alberto K. Fujimori to delay the vote for three weeks, until international election monitors could test computer systems to ensure an honest vote.A1Dominican Wins Presidency  A left-leaning populist, Hipolito Mejia, found his path to the presidency cleared of its last obstacle when his opponent from the governing party, Danilo Medina, declined to seek a runoff.A6China Trade Debate Heats Up  The political jockeying on a China trade bill entered an intensive final stretch as both the Clinton administration and its opponents claimed crucial backing.A12U.S. Missile Test Delayed  The Pentagon said the next decisive test of a national missile defense system, planned for June 26, had again been delayed by a wiring problem, increasing pressure on the project's managers to meet the Clinton administration's timetable for deciding whether to deploy the system.A12Iran Gets World Bank Loans  The World Bank, over the objections of the United States, approved its first loans to Iran in seven years: $232 million for a sewage-treatment project in Tehran and for improvements in health care.A7Ethiopia Continues Advance  Hundreds of thousands of people fled their homes in western Eritrea as Ethiopian troops captured a strategic town, Barentu, and pressed on with their rapid advance.A3World BriefingA8NATIONALA16-24U.S. Admits Fault in Fire And Pledges Compensation  Interior Secretary Bruce Babbitt said the government was to blame for the destruction caused by the Los Alamos fire and would compensate victims. His remarks coincided with a report of an inquiry into the Park Service's decision to start the fire to clear underbrush. More than 400 homes have been destroyed.A1F.B.I. Memo on Reno  The F.B.I. director, Louis J. Freeh, wrote in 1996 that Attorney General Janet Reno and a top deputy should remove themselves from an inquiry into Democratic fund-raising, after the aide was quoted as saying Mrs. Reno could lose her job if the inquiry proceeded, officials said.A20F.B.I. Mishandled Lee Case  The Federal Bureau of Investigation gravely mishandled its inquiry into Wen Ho Lee, the nuclear scientist suspected of passing secrets to the Chinese government, a Justice Department review concluded.A20F.A.A. Orders Bolt Inspections  The Federal Aviation Administration ordered airlines flying the Boeing 767 to check the bolts that hold the plane's engines in place after an airline reported finding damage to the bolts.A24Move to Abolish Death Penalty  The New Hampshire Legislature became the first in the nation to approve a bill banning capital punishment since the Supreme Court allowed executions to resume in 1976. The governor plans to veto it.A16Confederate Flag Coming Down  The South Carolina legislature agreed to remove the Confederate battle flag from its chambers and the Capitol dome and place it at a nearby memorial to Confederate soldiers.A16Talk Show Host Losing Backing  Protests by gay rights advocacy groups against Dr. Laura Schlessinger got more results. Procter & Gamble said it will not advertise on her radio or television shows.A21Limiting Pastorates to Men  Leaders of the Southern Baptist Convention proposed revising the denomination's basic statement of faith to say that the Bible lets only men be church pastors.A16NEW YORK/REGIONB1-8Mother and Son Guilty Of Murdering Socialite  Sante and Kenneth Kimes, described by prosecutors as a prolific and pitiless con artist team, were convicted of murdering a wealthy woman as part an intricate scheme to steal her Upper East Side townhouse. The body of the 82-year-old victim, Irene Silverman, has never been found.A1Disabled Girl Found Dead  A 5-year-old Bronx girl with cerebral palsy was found dead in her apartment on Wednesday. A preliminary report noted signs of malnutrition on her 17-pound body. The mother was held for 24 hours and released, pending final autopsy results.B1The Speaker Fights a Revolt  Sheldon Silver, a Democrat from Manhattan, moved against a challenge to his leadership, retaliating against renegades and enlisting union officials and party leaders to shore up his power base.B1SCIENCE/HEALTHAlternative to 'Fight or Flight'  Researchers say females often show a different reaction to stress, involving nurturing and seeking support from others rather than aggression or escape. The ''tend and befriend'' response, seen both in humans and animals, may derive from hormonal differences between the sexes.A20EDUCATIONYale to Honor a Critic  William F. Buckley Jr., a founder of modern American conservatism who in 1951 accused Yale of rejecting God, is returning to campus on Monday, to accept an honorary degree.B1WEEKENDE1-28; E29-46OBITUARIESA25  Frederick Donald Coggan  A former archbishop of Canterbury and the first spiritual head of the Church of England to support the ordination of women, he was 90.A25BUSINESS DAYC1-20Insurance Fraud Settlement  Columbia/HCA Healthcare has agreed in principle to $745 million in civil penalties to resolve part of the government's case into whether its success was partly gained by cheating federal health programs.A1Cable TV Dispute Ends  Time Warner's chairman said his company and Walt Disney had agreed to end a rancorous dispute over the cable transmission of television networks owned by Disney.C1Barrier to Phone Merger  The staff of the Justice Department's antitrust division were said to have recommended that the government block the proposed $115 billion merger of WorldCom and Sprint.C1European Interest in Nabisco  Cadbury Schweppes and Groupe Danone were said to be weighing a joint bid for Nabisco Holdings.C1Business DigestC1SPORTSD1-8Philadelphia Goes Up, 2-1  The Flyers beat the Devils, 4-2, to take the lead in the four-of-seven-game Eastern playoff finals.D1EDITORIALA26-27Editorials: The Albany uprising; prosecuting Foday Sankoh; blunders in Los Alamos; a model child care system.  Columns: Thomas L. Friedman.CrosswordE44  TV ListingsE27  Public LivesB2  WeatherD8
The words echo across the highly suspect political road of good intentions. ''We're not going to run that kind of race,'' insisted Stuart Stevens, one of Gov. George W. Bush's advertising people. ''Tonally, we will run another kind of race.''If the Gore campaign does get vicious, the Bush image-makers say, it will not be because the mud was slung first from Austin. ''They're planning on running a mean, nasty, negative race,'' said Mr. Stevens's colleague, Russell Schriefer.The words echo across the highly suspect political road of good intentions. ''We're not going to run that kind of race,'' insisted Stuart Stevens, one of Gov. George W. Bush's advertising people. ''Tonally, we will run another kind of race.''If the Gore campaign does get vicious, the Bush image-makers say, it will not be because the mud was slung first from Austin. ''They're planning on running a mean, nasty, negative race,'' said Mr. Stevens's colleague, Russell Schriefer.The view was repeated in the agency's headquarters here as if it were a mantra. ''Gore has always run negative campaigns,'' said Mark McKinnon, the Bush camp's chief ad maker. To which Mr. Stevens added, ''They would take offense if you accused them of running a positive one.''Not for nothing do the members of Maverick Media, the organization assembled for the express goal of cultivating Mr. Bush's appeal on radio and television, operate out of a basement warren of offices they call the bunker: the first steady, 30-second barrages of the general election have not even been set off yet, and already the Bush message people are crying foul.Tactically, it is reminiscent of the primary campaign, during which the major candidates of both parties were accusing one another of running low-down, dirty commercials, when, for the most part, the spots were fairly tame.But the pre-emptive protests may also indicate a certain jitteriness among the half-dozen principal members of the Maverick team, some of whom are working on a national presidential media campaign for the first time. There is an inside-the-bunker air of a group of well-mannered folks who have stumbled into the toughest neighborhood in town.In a cutthroat business, Mr. McKinnon is admired for his decency. ''He's known for running very fair campaigns,'' said John Weaver, who was political director for Senator John McCain's primary campaign.But when the opposition consists of the likes of Carter Eskew and Robert Shrum, veteran media strategists for Vice President Al Gore who have take-no-prisoners reputations, the question arises: Does Mr. Bush need a team that plays by the Marquess of Queensberry rules, or by Mike Tyson's? Can Maverick avoid the errors made in Bill Bradley's political advertising, which never adequately answered Mr. Gore's incessant criticisms?Mr. McKinnon, in fact, acknowledges that he would much rather paint a portrait than have to slash someone else's. ''It's much more powerful and compelling to create a positive vision than it is to tear somebody down,'' he said.That sensibility is reflected in many of the spots Mr. McKinnon creates for Mr. Bush, warm and fuzzy images reminiscent of the upbeat advertisements for Ronald Reagan. The McKinnon style is more documentary; the innovation Maverick introduced in the primaries was the ''crash ad,'' filmed, edited and on the air in 24 hours.And his spots feature lots of shimmering boilerplate: shots of Mr. Bush wading into smiling crowds, posed in dazzling sunshine with his wife, Laura, or offering his family-sampler takes on heart-tugging issues. ''I believe every child can learn,'' he said in one education spot.Mr. McKinnon and company know they cannot run their campaign on happy talk; indeed, alongside the sunny spots, Mr. Bush and his allies ran some of the harshest commercials of the primaries, including attack ads that portrayed Senator McCain as an enemy of the environment and breast cancer research.And the question of tone is not their only challenge. Although Mr. Bush is an immensely likable candidate, questions about his grasp of foreign affairs and other issues could be magnified in comparisons with Mr. Gore, and some political observers wonder if Maverick will be able to fill in the gaps.''Here's the hard thing,'' said Paul Begala, a former adviser to President Clinton who has known and liked Mr. McKinnon since their days together at the University of Texas. ''Mark's greatest strength is style, and Bush has a style that meshes well with Mark's. In small settings Bush is very charming: the most charming politician to come down the pike since Clinton. Mark does an excellent job of capturing that. But at the end of the day there is no filter that can be put on a camera to add gray matter.''The question of depth is clearly one of the candidate's most vexing image problems. The governor's media advisers, though, maintain that such doubts about Mr. Bush exist in a land where political commentators reside, but not the voters.As he sat in a windowless conference room ringed with television sets, the affable Mr. McKinnon would not be coaxed into a meditation on any of Mr. Bush's perceived weaknesses. If it seemed a function of a political advertising man's natural inclination to project only the bright side, it also reflected what those who know him say is Mr. McKinnon's genuine belief in Mr. Bush, a deep and abiding affection characteristic of those in the governor's inner circle.Former Mayor Bob Lanier of Houston, for whom Mr. McKinnon made commercials in all three of his successful mayoral campaigns, says there can be only one explanation for Mr. McKinnon's signing up: ''If he's supporting George Bush, it's because he thinks George Bush would make a good president.''If there are conventional routes to making  commercials for this potential president, Mr. McKinnon did not take them. For one thing, he climbed the wrong ladder: he was  a longtime Democratic media strategist before signing up with Mr. Bush, working on the campaigns of, among others, former Gov. Ann W. Richards of Texas and former Gov. Buddy Roemer of Louisiana.In fact, Mr. McKinnon, a Colorado-born musician who in his younger days was invited to Nashville to write songs for Kris Kristofferson, had dropped out of politics entirely by the time he fell into a long conversation with Mr. Bush in a chance encounter at a dinner in Austin in 1997. The year before, Mr. McKinnon confessed in a most public way -- a first-person article for Texas Monthly -- that after 15 years of politics, he was burned out.''Maybe I got tired of candidates' asking me what their firmly held convictions should be,'' he wrote. ''Maybe I got tired of accusing opponents of being right-wing extremists who wanted to cut Social Security benefits.''At that Austin dinner, though, Mr. McKinnon's head was turned. Mr. Bush seemed to him to evince an honest interest in education, an issue dear to Mr. McKinnon; he was making a documentary about the inspirational founder of a Houston charter school. ''I was amazed, blown away, by how much attention he paid,'' Mr. McKinnon said of the governor, and before long he had signed up to handle media in Mr. Bush's 1998 campaign for re-election as governor.Mr. McKinnon did not win friends among Texas Democrats for his defection; he is unfazed. ''What does it say about me, my values?'' he asked. ''I think what attracted me to him is what is going to attract a lot of independents and Democrats. I came to the conclusion that in the end, good politics is about good people.''He also has a reputation for not going for the jugular.''I can't recall any campaign where I've worked against him where he even got close to crossing the line,'' Mr. Weaver said.That is high praise from a McCain aide, considering how aggrieved his boss felt by some of the commercials Mr. Bush ran in South Carolina.The Bush campaign had been expecting the most intense media battering to come from the campaign of another primary-election opponent, Steve Forbes, but it was Mr. McCain who surprised Mr. Bush with the harder hitting commercials, including one in New Hampshire in which Mr. McCain said Mr. Bush's tax cuts would mostly benefit the wealthy. Some of Mr. Bush's advisers believe that their failure to answer the commercial was a major factor in their sobering early loss in New Hampshire.But by South Carolina they had learned from their mistake. In one of the most effective strategies of the primary season, Mr. Bush was able to turn Mr. McCain's clean-campaign vows against him. In an advertisement shot at a fishing camp in South Carolina, a serious-looking Mr. Bush responded to a McCain commercial in which the senator accused the governor of twisting the truth, ''like Clinton.''''Disagree with me, fine,'' Mr. Bush intoned in his advertisement of reply. ''But do not challenge my integrity.''It was a subtle and successful lesson in the art of the double-negative commercial: suggest that an opponent was unworthy because he said something mean.''Everywhere we ran that ad, the numbers moved,'' said Matthew Dowd, another member of the Maverick team.''Mark made the best ad of the primaries when Bush looked into the camera and said, 'He compared me to Clinton,' '' said Mr. Begala, now a commentator on CNBC's ''Equal Time.'' ''It gave Bush carte blanche to turn his guns on McCain.''Vast amounts of money will be spent on political commercials at all levels this year -- $600 million, according to the Television Bureau of Advertising -- and a lot of it by the Bush and Gore campaigns.Still, Mr. McKinnon does not think this election will be decided inside the bunker.''I just believe there are so many other facets in the campaign that are so much more important,'' he said. ''The media, the free press, is the wind that fills the sails. The advertising acts as a rudder, to steer a little bit.''THE 2000 CAMPAIGN: THE AD CAMPAIGNS
The Council for National Policy is a little-known group whose members are often very well known and very conservative. There are radio personalities like Oliver L. North and James C. Dobson; religious broadcasters like Pat Robertson and Jerry Falwell; and lawmakers like Senator Jesse Helms of North Carolina and Representative Dick Armey of Texas.It is the sort of group a Republican presidential hopeful would presumably want to address, which is exactly what Gov. George W. Bush of Texas did last October when the council held a two-day conference in San Antonio. But what exactly did Mr. Bush say?The Council for National Policy is a little-known group whose members are often very well known and very conservative. There are radio personalities like Oliver L. North and James C. Dobson; religious broadcasters like Pat Robertson and Jerry Falwell; and lawmakers like Senator Jesse Helms of North Carolina and Representative Dick Armey of Texas.It is the sort of group a Republican presidential hopeful would presumably want to address, which is exactly what Gov. George W. Bush of Texas did last October when the council held a two-day conference in San Antonio. But what exactly did Mr. Bush say?Skipp Porteous has tried to find out, though as yet without success. Mr. Porteous is national director of the Institute for First Amendment Studies, a group based in Massachusetts with about 3,000 members nationwide that tries to keep watch on the council. He regards the council as a secretive umbrella group plotting strategy for the Republican right.The council says such talk is silly. It calls itself a nonpartisan educational foundation.In recent years, Mr. Porteous said his group had planted a spy in several meetings. But he found his group shut out when the council met in San Antonio.Eager to know what Mr. Bush might say in private to conservative leaders, Mr. Porteous sent for audiotapes of the conference. The council sells audiotapes of conferences to members only, but the institute had obtained an order form from the company, Skynet Media, that handles the recording.So when a package arrived earlier this year, Mr. Porteous thought success was at hand. But the tape of Mr. Bush's speech was not included.Morton C. Blackwell, the council's executive director, said all speakers were asked for permission to include their remarks on the tapes and that the Bush campaign had declined.''The Bush entourage said they preferred that the tape not go out, though I could not see any reason why they shouldn't,'' Mr. Blackwell said.He added, ''Basically everything he said, he's said before, and I've heard since.''Ari Fleischer, a spokesman for the Bush campaign, said that if anyone was ''hoping to hear something that the governor would say that he hasn't said publicly, then they're on a wild goose chase.'' He declined to characterize the speech, saying, ''When we go to meetings that are private, they remain private.''In fact, Mr. Fleischer said, ''as far as we know, there is no tape.''But Mr. Blackwell said the Bush campaign should have a copy.Curt Morse, president of Skynet Media, said that he had a copy and that one was provided to the campaign.''Maybe they lost it,'' he said. He offered to make them a copy.THE 2000 CAMPAIGN: THE GOVERNOR'S SPEECH
Here is one difference between Tipper Gore and Hillary Clinton.At Sunday's Million Mom March on behalf of gun control, Mrs. Clinton, wearing a light spring pantsuit and straw hat, was so busy working the crowds that she created rally gridlock. Mrs. Gore, wearing a white T-shirt tucked into her blue jeans, marched arm in arm with other women, without an entourage and relatively unheralded.Here is one difference between Tipper Gore and Hillary Clinton.At Sunday's Million Mom March on behalf of gun control, Mrs. Clinton, wearing a light spring pantsuit and straw hat, was so busy working the crowds that she created rally gridlock. Mrs. Gore, wearing a white T-shirt tucked into her blue jeans, marched arm in arm with other women, without an entourage and relatively unheralded.Mrs. Clinton, of course, is first lady, a candidate for Senate, and an international celebrity. But, if any political wife in America has been presumed to be her heir, and had an opportunity to study Mrs. Clinton's example up close, it is the fellow blonde who rode the bus with her and their husbands in the 1992 presidential campaign and who broke into a spontaneous dance-like hug with her at the 1992 Democratic convention.But the two women's different styles at the march offered a vivid contrast between their current approaches to their public roles. Mrs. Clinton's high-stakes political ambition has thrust her into a public life with very little private space. Mrs. Gore, on the other hand, appears reluctant and ambivalent about her public role yet firm in her conviction that she can maintain a zone of privacy -- a phrase that Mrs. Clinton coined -- even if her husband, Al, happens to be running for president.Having spent nearly half of her life as a political wife, Mrs. Gore, who is 51, has had plenty of opportunity to consider what may lie ahead if her husband, the vice president for seven years and now the presumptive Democratic nominee, becomes president. But, she said with some trepidation in a recent interview, ''It's a whole new territory for me.''Mrs. Gore is reluctant to talk about the public-private balancing act, but campaign aides said she was fearful of how a presidential campaign might consume her family life. At times the Gores' 26-year-old daughter, Karenna Gore Schiff, seems more comfortable in the public spotlight than her mother.  (Karenna is an adviser to the Gore campaign, but her siblings -- Kristin, who is 23; Sarah, 21; and Albert 3d, 17 -- have kept lower profiles.)Mrs. Gore ''wants to maintain her individuality,'' an aide to Mr. Gore said. ''That will be a struggle.''Even as the campaign heats up, Mrs. Gore said, she hopes to continue activities she does now with relative anonymity -- like searching out the homeless at night and encouraging them into shelters, or going out with her husband to see movies in actual theaters, rather than in private screening rooms.Mrs. Gore's mixed feelings about her mixed lives may stem from her very public role as the voice of parental outrage over the sexual and violent content of rock music lyrics, a self-styled crusade in the mid-1980's that earned her the enmity of many in the music industry. At the time, the musician Frank Zappa branded her as a ''cultural terrorist'' and dismissed her effort as a ''housewife-hobby project.''Mrs. Gore defends those efforts, which led to the recording industry's placement of warning labels on albums that contained explicit content.''Music labeling has been going on long enough now that it's just part of the cultural tableau,'' she said. ''The generations change and people who might have had a different opinion understand it now, actually appreciate it and actually use it.''Mrs. Gore may insist on her privacy -- Friday is the Gores' 30th wedding anniversary, an occasion that her husband has trumpeted on the campaign trail, but that she wants to be spent privately -- but also lives a public life.Earlier this month, for instance, she appeared on stage at Robert F. Kennedy Stadium in Washington and played the drums in front of 45,000 people at a concert on the eve of a gay rights march. (Mrs. Gore played the drums in a girl group, the Wildcats, in high school and is surely the only candidate's wife to have played with members of the Grateful Dead.)''I was asked to do it and I believe in the cause,'' she said. ''And I thought, Yeah, it'll be fun. It's a continuation of my commitment to have fun on the campaign trail.''How much fun she is actually having is not clear, nor is her precise role. She campaigns separately from her husband, adapting to each occasion and generally steering clear of policy. She provides what campaign advisers say is a much-needed human, down-to-earth dimension to the legendarily stiff vice president.She frequently talks to youth audiences and, having disclosed last year that she fought her own battle with depression, the conversations often touch on the darker side of teenage life. On Wednesday, she represented the Gores at the funeral for the son of Representative Bart Stupak, Democrat of Michigan. The 17-year-old son had committed suicide.At a recent speech in Virginia to the parents of gays and lesbians, Mrs. Gore talked in a soft, hesitant voice about the need for ''unconditional love.'' But she also advocates on behalf of her husband's causes. At a union event last week in Cincinnati, she called for equal pay for women.Campaign advisers said Mrs. Gore had ''a seat at the table'' but this is more figurative than literal. She is not involved in the day-to-day tactical discussions or strategy conference calls, they said. But she is perceived as a valuable asset who can cover the so-called secondary media markets. Her real value, said those who know her well, is helping Mr. Gore relax and keeping the family's priorities in front of him.Mrs. Gore does not much like to describe how she would see her role as first lady or to compare herself with Mrs. Clinton. But from all indications, she would be in the more traditional mold.In an interview last year with The Associated Press, Mrs. Gore said: ''With four children and aging parents, I find that I only spend so much time on issues that I care about, and I spend a lot of time on keeping the family together.''Mrs. Gore's counterpart on the Republican side, Laura Bush, has also seemed somewhat uncomfortable in the spotlight. She was a reluctant participant in George W. Bush's first political race, in 1978, and was not eager for him to run for governor of Texas or for the presidency.Mrs. Gore's campaign appearances trail have subsided since her husband wrapped up the nomination in March. In February, she campaigned on 20 of 28 days of the month in 22 states. By April, she was down to 10 days. ''We expect to be back in action fairly soon,'' said Camille Johnston, Mrs. Gore's spokeswoman.Indeed, the traditional campaign role of chief family helpmate sometimes seems to be occupied by her daughter Karenna, who graduated from Columbia Law School on Tuesday. Mrs. Schiff has emerged as an influential adviser to her father, particularly on addressing concerns of  her generation. And Mr. Gore appears keen on grooming her for a life in politics.Over the years, and especially in this campaign, Mr. Gore has sent mixed signals about what he views as private, often drawing on his family archives to help soften his image.At the 1992 Democratic convention, he talked extensively about his son's near-death experience; at the 1996 convention he discussed his sister's death from lung cancer.When Mr. Gore and his son hiked up Mount Rainier last summer, reporters were not told of the outing until the two had reached bottom. But before the Washington State primary this year, his campaign used the trek in a commercial.Gil Troy, a professor of American history at McGill University and author of a book about presidential couples (''Mr. and Mrs. President, from the Trumans to the Clintons,'' University Press of Kansas), said that much of Mrs. Gore's life was ''poignant and frustrating'' but also a bit disingenuous.''She had a searing experience in the 80's with the crusade against the cultural pollutants in Hollywood, and she was badly abused,'' he said.But, Mr. Troy added, ''if Tipper Gore really wants her privacy, she should have told Al to run for president of the Kiwanis Club.''Patricia Ireland, president of the National Organization for Women, said she hoped that the next first lady would work to complete the ''unfinished business'' of issues of women's equality.Ms. Ireland said she did not expect Mrs. Gore ''to be out there articulating the intricacy of issues,'' but that she could help gain respect for full-time mothers and homemakers.''She's pretty consistent in being who she is,'' Ms. Ireland said, ''and who she is is a more traditional role, but she does it well.''THE 2000 CAMPAIGN: THE VICE PRESIDENT'S WIFE
Director Louis J. Freeh of the F.B.I. warned in 1996 that Attorney General Janet Reno and one of her top deputies should remove themselves from an investigation into Democratic fund-raising after the aide was quoted as saying that Ms. Reno could lose her job if the inquiry proceeded, government officials said today.Mr. Freeh's warning, they said, was in a memorandum that the Federal Bureau of Investigation provided this week to Senate investigators who are reviewing the Justice Department's investigation of campaign fund-raising improprieties by Democrats in the 1996 campaign.Director Louis J. Freeh of the F.B.I. warned in 1996 that Attorney General Janet Reno and one of her top deputies should remove themselves from an investigation into Democratic fund-raising after the aide was quoted as saying that Ms. Reno could lose her job if the inquiry proceeded, government officials said today.Mr. Freeh's warning, they said, was in a memorandum that the Federal Bureau of Investigation provided this week to Senate investigators who are reviewing the Justice Department's investigation of campaign fund-raising improprieties by Democrats in the 1996 campaign.The memorandum could cast new light on Ms. Reno's early decision making in the investigation and her later decision to turn aside the advice of Mr. Freeh and her own chief campaign finance prosecutor and close an investigation into Vice President Al Gore. That decision greatly eased Mr. Gore's burden as he prepared to open his bid for the White House, but it embroiled Ms. Reno in harsh criticism that she was seeking to protect her superiors. She has insisted that her decision not to seek an independent counsel in the case was motivated by a lack of evidence, not by any sort of political pressure.The memorandum is additional evidence of the deep, longstanding split between Mr. Freeh and Ms. Reno, and its existence became known as Ms. Reno received an internal report this week that faulted both the Justice Department and the F.B.I. for failures to cooperate in the investigation of the nuclear scientist Wen Ho Lee. Officials said the report was especially tough on the bureau.According to the Dec. 9, 1996, memorandum on the campaign fund-raising investigation, Mr. Freeh recounted remarks attributed to Lee Radek, the Justice Department's chief of public integrity, in which Mr. Radek was said to have claimed that he was under considerable pressure to scrap the investigation because Ms. Reno's job ''might hang in the balance,'' the officials said.Administration officials had been widely quoted at the time as suggesting that Ms. Reno might be asked to step aside and allow the appointment of a new attorney general in President Clinton's second term. The existence of the memorandum was first reported by The Associated Press.Mr. Freeh's memorandum, which was addressed to the bureau's deputy director, William J. Esposito, recounted remarks made to Mr. Esposito by Mr. Radek, the officials said.Mr. Radek was traveling in Europe today and was not immediately available for comment. But in a prepared statement released to The Associated Press, he said he did not recall making such statements.''I have no recollection of ever saying I was under pressure because the attorney general's job hung in the balance,'' Mr. Radek said. ''Nor is it something I would have said because it has no basis in fact.''Myron Marlin, the Justice Department spokesman, said Ms. Reno's actions were based on the law, not on personal or political considerations. ''This attorney general has never let her own self-interest color her decision-making,'' he said. ''She proceeds by the book, based on the facts and the law.''Rallying to Ms. Reno's defense, Justice Department officials noted that the attorney general sent nine separate matters to independent counsels for investigation.In 1997, a year after Mr. Freeh's memorandum, the officials noted, Ms. Reno expanded the jurisdiction of Kenneth W. Starr, the independent counsel whose inquiry into the Monica Lewinsky matter led to the president's impeachment in 1998. In Mr. Freeh's memorandum, which is being studied by the House and Senate judiciary committees, he told Mr. Esposito that he had confronted the attorney general and Mr. Radek and urged them both to step down from the investigation, the officials said.Ms. Reno apparently refused, and the rift between her and Mr. Freeh has widened considerably during Mr. Clinton's second term.The investigation of Democratic fund-raising began in the midst of Mr. Clinton's re-election campaign in 1996, when Justice Department prosecutors reviewed several instances of questionable fund-raising by senior Democrats, including Mr. Gore.The vice president came under intensive scrutiny by prosecutors over his activities at what was later described as a fund-raising event at a Buddhist temple in Hacienda Heights, Calif., in April 1996.In a letter on Nov. 1, 1996, to a top federal prosecutor in Los Angeles, Mr. Radek said the local investigation of the incident had to be brought to a halt and turned over to the Justice Department in Washington because of the potential for appointment of an independent counsel.''Your office should take no steps to investigate these matters at this time,'' Mr. Radek wrote.The temple inquiry eventually exonerated Mr. Gore, although it led to an conviction of a California fund-raiser, Maria Hsia, who helped organize Mr. Gore's visit to the temple.Mr. Gore said initially that he did not know that the temple event was a fund-raiser, although he later acknowledged that he knew it was ''finance-related.''
In a victory for the Clinton administration, the Senate today narrowly rejected a measure to set a deadline for withdrawing American ground troops from Kosovo. Gov. George W. Bush of Texas had also criticized the measure, but even so 40 Republicans voted for it.By a vote of 53 to 47, senators stripped a provision from a military construction spending bill that would have cut off funds for the 5,600 United States troops in Kosovo by July 1, 2001, forcing their withdrawal unless Congress authorized an extension.In a victory for the Clinton administration, the Senate today narrowly rejected a measure to set a deadline for withdrawing American ground troops from Kosovo. Gov. George W. Bush of Texas had also criticized the measure, but even so 40 Republicans voted for it.By a vote of 53 to 47, senators stripped a provision from a military construction spending bill that would have cut off funds for the 5,600 United States troops in Kosovo by July 1, 2001, forcing their withdrawal unless Congress authorized an extension.In recent days, several of President Clinton's cabinet officers waged an all-out campaign to defeat the measure, phoning wavering senators and sending military commanders to Congress to warn of the dangers to American troops and Washington's commitment to the NATO operation if the measure passed. Defense Secretary William S. Cohen said he would recommend that Mr. Clinton veto the legislation if it passed.The outcome was close enough, and important enough for the administration, that Vice President Al Gore presided over the roll-call, prepared to cast a tie-breaking vote if needed. ''To have been forced to withdraw in this manner would have demoralized our allies and emboldened those in the region who favor violence as a solution to their disputes,'' Mr. Gore said in a statement.Fifteen of the 55 Republicans voted for a Democratic amendment to strike the withdrawal language from the $8.6 billion military construction spending bill. At least two or three Republicans said they were swayed by Mr. Bush, the presumptive Republican presidential nominee, but many others were not, and they could challenge him on foreign policy if he becomes President. [News analysis, Page A10.]''I'm glad Bush said what he said because it showed this was not aimed at this president in particular,'' said Thad Cochran of Mississippi, who was among those persuaded by Mr. Bush.Earlier this week, Mr. Bush criticized the provision, calling it a ''legislative overreach'' that would tie his hands if he became president. Today, a spokesman for Mr. Bush, Scott McClellan, said, ''The Senate made the right decision.''The legislation revealed the restiveness in Congress over America's open-ended commitment in Kosovo and Bosnia, which so far has cost $20 billion. It also stoked the smoldering debate over competing prerogatives: Congress's constitutional power of the purse and the president's authority to send American forces to far-flung hot spots.In several hours of heated debate today and on Wednesday, both sides accused the other of jeopardizing the safety of United States troops, America's commitment to its European allies and the long-term security of the Balkans.''The intent of the amendment is to restore congressional oversight over the Kosovo mission,'' said Senator Robert C. Byrd of West Virginia, the provision's chief Democratic sponsor. ''Of course, the administration doesn't like it. They want a free hand to participate in military adventurism whenever and wherever they please. They don't want to hear a peep out of Congress.''But critics said imposing an arbitrary deadline for withdrawal would send a dangerous signal of uncertain American resolve to President Slobodan Milosevic of Yugoslavia, and undermine the unity and morale of NATO's peacekeeping operation, which involves forces from Britain, France, Germany, Italy and other nations, in and out of Europe. They are trying to calm Kosovo in the aftermath of NATO's bombing of Yugoslavia early last year, when NATO acted to protect Albanians in the province.A deadline ''would precipitate a year of dangerous uncertainty and wavering commitment to our allies,'' said Senator Carl Levin, Democrat of Michigan, a leading foe of the provision and sponsor of the amendment to kill it.The 15 Republicans joined 38 Democrats in supporting Mr. Levin's decisive amendment, while 40 Republicans and 7 Democrats opposed it.Mr. Levin's measure also eliminated a second provision to withhold 25 percent of the military's funds in Kosovo this year, unless Mr. Clinton certified by July 15 that the European allies were meeting their commitments for reconstruction aid, police officers and food and medicines. Without that certification, the measure required that money could be spent in Kosovo only for an orderly withdrawal of American forces.The defeated provision's chief Republican author, Senator John W. Warner of Virginia, the chairman of the Armed Services Committee, remained undaunted. He vowed to offer the provision on the European share of aid as an amendment to the Pentagon's budget bill for fiscal year 2001 when that reaches the Senate floor.On Wednesday, the House approved, by a vote of 264 to 153, an amendment on the European aid share similar to the Senate's. But the House version gives the next president until April 1, 2001, nearly nine months longer than the Senate, to certify that the European allies are meeting their commitments.The House version sets even higher standards than the Senate provision. Under the House measure, the allies would be responsible for 50 percent of reconstruction aid; the Senate version required at least 33 percent. The House version would require allies to pick up 90 percent of the new civilian police in Kosovo; the Senate version required 75 percent.The allies are now providing 63 percent of the police and are close to providing 75 percent of basic human aid, the White House said. The United States has pledged 15 percent of the total financial support to Kosovo.The director of the White House Office of Management and Budget, Jacob J. Lew, said the allies had made significant progress in raising the proportion of their pledges, but he could not guarantee they would meet the targets by July 15.Moreover, he said, the allies used different bookkeeping practices, which ''could prevent certification of numeric burden-sharing shares.''''The rigid, mechanical burden-sharing tests contained in the amendment undermine the peacekeeping effort,'' Mr. Lew said in a letter to the Senate Democratic leader, Tom Daschle of South Dakota. ''The commitment of American forces abroad should not rest on mechanical formulas and record-keeping technicalities.''It was unclear tonight whether Mr. Clinton's advisers would recommend that he veto any legislation containing just the burden-sharing requirements, and not the more onerous language about withdrawing troops.But it seemed almost certain that the fight over American military involvement in the Balkans would not end with today's vote.''We have no long-term plan for Kosovo,'' complained Senator Trent Lott of Mississippi, the majority leader, who supported the deadline for withdrawing American forces.  ''We don't know how long we're going or how much it's going to cost.  Commitments are not being fulfilled by the Europeans, and that's unacceptable.''
To the Editor:Re ''Bush Presents Social Security as Crucial Test'' (front page, May 16): I applaud George W. Bush's plan to allow individuals to invest their Social Security money in the stock market. As a 19-year-old student, I know that Social Security can't provide for me when I retire.  I've already started to save and put my money in the stock market. And I don't like the idea of the government essentially choosing how I am to save for my retirement.To the Editor:Re ''Bush Presents Social Security as Crucial Test'' (front page, May 16): I applaud George W. Bush's plan to allow individuals to invest their Social Security money in the stock market. As a 19-year-old student, I know that Social Security can't provide for me when I retire.  I've already started to save and put my money in the stock market. And I don't like the idea of the government essentially choosing how I am to save for my retirement.I don't want my retirement income to be based on the ratio of taxpayers who can support me. I want to be supported by the rewards of liquidity. Government ought to be rolled back from dictating the way that the few dollars we have are spent.MATT SORIANO  Hanover, N.H., May 17, 2000
To the Editor:George W. Bush's plan to allow workers to choose how to invest some of their Social Security money is going to get us all into trouble (front page, May 16).The recent growth in the stock market is tempting all of us. But you do not have to look very far to see some really big losers. Some of those who bought dot-com stocks have lost a large part of their investment. Mr.To the Editor:George W. Bush's plan to allow workers to choose how to invest some of their Social Security money is going to get us all into trouble (front page, May 16).The recent growth in the stock market is tempting all of us. But you do not have to look very far to see some really big losers. Some of those who bought dot-com stocks have lost a large part of their investment. Mr.Bush may well be able to gamble his wealth on his new Social Security plan, but there are millions of Americans who will need every penny to make ends meet.JACK MCGANN  St. Augustine, Fla., May 17, 2000
To the Editor:Re ''Bush Presents Social Security as Crucial Test'' (front page, May 16): One question should warn those who think that individual investments will outperform Social Security: what private pension plan, with its carefully managed investments, has been able to provide cost-of-living increases to its beneficiaries?WILLIAM HOHRI  Lomita, Calif., May 17, 2000To the Editor:Re ''Bush Presents Social Security as Crucial Test'' (front page, May 16): One question should warn those who think that individual investments will outperform Social Security: what private pension plan, with its carefully managed investments, has been able to provide cost-of-living increases to its beneficiaries?WILLIAM HOHRI  Lomita, Calif., May 17, 2000
A Republican senator has singlehandedly blocked the United States from paying $368 million that it owes the United Nations for four difficult peacekeeping missions, infuriating the Clinton administration and some of its allies.The dispute is the latest skirmish in a running battle between an administration that has used American power and money abroad in operations short of war and a Republican-led Congress that disdains many of those missions.A Republican senator has singlehandedly blocked the United States from paying $368 million that it owes the United Nations for four difficult peacekeeping missions, infuriating the Clinton administration and some of its allies.The dispute is the latest skirmish in a running battle between an administration that has used American power and money abroad in operations short of war and a Republican-led Congress that disdains many of those missions.The senator, Judd Gregg of New Hampshire, has used his power as chairman of the Senate Appropriations Subcommittee to stop the State Department from transferring the money -- already approved by Congress -- to the United Nations for missions in Congo, East Timor, Kosovo and Sierra Leone.Administration officials said unless the money was released, the United Nations' ability to undertake such missions, already frayed, might break down. The forces may lack gasoline and electricity in Kosovo, face difficult delays in their imminent and potentially dangerous Congo mission, and go unpaid in Sierra Leone, United Nations and administration officials said.Mr. Gregg objects most strongly to the Sierra Leone operation. He said in an interview he would not lift his block until the situation there had changed. ''I'm not going to pay for a policy that's unethical and, as it turns out, barbaric,'' Mr. Gregg said.He was referring to a peace agreement signed in July by the combatants in Sierra Leone's eight-year-old civil war. The accord gave amnesty and a share of power to rebels who had terrorized civilians, murdering, raping and mutilating thousands. The rebels, whose leader, Foday Sankoh, was arrested this week in Sierra Leone, have held hostage hundreds of United Nations soldiers sent to try to stop the violence.Mr. Gregg, like many of his Republican colleagues in Congress, has a low opinion of peacekeeping in particular and President Clinton's foreign policies in general.''I do not think this administration has been engaged in a coherent way,'' he said. ''They have made very bad decisions.''As head of the subcommittee that governs the State Department budget, Mr. Gregg can block money for foreign policy without hearings, debate or votes.That power is ''unique to appropriations chairmen,'' Mr. Gregg said. He has refused to let the department transfer hundreds of millions of dollars to help pay for the four operations that he finds objectionable.He placed a hold on $96 million for the Sierra Leone force; $181 million for East Timor, where United Nations troops are trying to maintain order on a island ravaged by forces that oppose the newly won independence from Indonesia; $50 million for Kosovo, where the troops are policing towns and cities to halt ethnic conflict; and $41 million for Congo, where soldiers are starting to set up a system to monitor a cease-fire.The under secretary general for peacekeeping operations at the United Nations, Bernard Miyet, said the United States' refusal to pay for the Sierra Leone mission was felt directly by third world nations that have sent troops.''Most of the countries involved are poor countries making human and financial sacrifices,'' Mr. Miyet said. ''The burden for Sierra Leone falls on India, Bangladesh, Jordan, Nigeria, Kenya, Ghana and Guinea, all countries in dire need of money. There have been difficulties in certain African countries,'' because the forces have not been paid on time.Mr. Miyet and several administration officials said the lack of money in Congo might slow the creation of communications networks, a system to control air traffic, improved roads and livable barracks.''In Kosovo,'' Mr. Miyet said, ''we might have difficulty paying our personnel, in particular the 3,700 policemen'' who are trying to maintain law and order and who work alongside a large contingent of NATO troops.Administration officials said the Kosovo mission also faced logistical problems like paying for gasoline and electricity.''And in Timor,'' he added, ''we might have difficulty reimbursing countries'' that have provided the troops.The under secretary general for management, Joseph E. Connor, said the United Nations owed $800 million to troops on peacekeeping missions in the last 10 years. ''Many member states are saying, 'Don't call us until you're ready to send the check,' '' Mr. Connor said.The United States now owes the United Nations $1.77 billion. Most of that bill is for peacekeeping.The United States is supposed to pay at least 25 percent of the peacekeeping costs. It now owes the United Nations $1.3 billion for past and present missions, Mr. Connor said. The bill has been increasing since Jan. 1, largely as a consequence of Mr. Gregg's block, he said. The United States also owes $468 million in membership dues, Mr. Connor added.Richard C. Holbrooke, the American ambassador to the United Nations, traveled to Africa this month as part of a Security Council delegation that paved the way for the Congo mission to begin. He declined a request for an interview today. Other administration officials said they were angry and embarrassed about the situation.''It really throws a spanner in the works,'' one said. ''When the U.N. sees the U.S. Congress is reluctant to pay the bills, they are less inclined to go along with U.S. leadership.''Another administration official said, ''It undermines the capacity of the U.N. to do its job and undermines our credibility to argue that we are serious about enhancing the peacekeeping ability of the U.N.''The officials were loath to criticize Mr. Gregg, fearing that he would block more money or cut the State Department budget.Pat M. Holt, a member of the staff of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee for 27 years, called the system that let a single member block spending that the entire Congress had appropriated a scandal.''It has no basis in law or Senate rules or history,'' Ms. Holt said.Law and tradition dictate that if an administration deviates in its spending from the program it presented to Congress, it has to report the changes to the appropriations committees. But ''this morphed into a system in which members and staff can object and the gutless wonders downtown don't dare disagree,'' Mr. Holt said.Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, whom Mr. Gregg strongly supported in the New Hampshire presidential primary, has not addressed blocking the peacekeeping money, said Condoleeza Rice, Mr. Bush's chief foreign policy adviser. ''Obviously,'' Ms. Rice said, ''the administration has some very hard work to do with Congress over the peacekeeping issue.''
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani withdrew from the most celebrated Senate race in the nation yesterday, saying that his health and his still-undecided treatment for prostate cancer were more important to him than his campaign against Hillary Rodham Clinton.In an emotional, riveting news conference, which he began in an uncharacteristically nervous voice, Mr. Giuliani said he wanted to devote his remaining 18 months in office to becoming a better mayor -- one who reaches out to minorities -- as well as becoming a better person. He took his listeners along on a psychological journey, holding out the possibility that his illness had changed him.Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani withdrew from the most celebrated Senate race in the nation yesterday, saying that his health and his still-undecided treatment for prostate cancer were more important to him than his campaign against Hillary Rodham Clinton.In an emotional, riveting news conference, which he began in an uncharacteristically nervous voice, Mr. Giuliani said he wanted to devote his remaining 18 months in office to becoming a better mayor -- one who reaches out to minorities -- as well as becoming a better person. He took his listeners along on a psychological journey, holding out the possibility that his illness had changed him.''I used to think the core of me was in politics, probably,'' Mr. Giuliani said. ''It isn't. When you feel your mortality and your humanity you realize that, that the core of you is first of all being able to take care of your health.'' [Page A14]A short time later in his half-hour of remarks in the City Hall Public Hearing Room, which was crowded with more than 35 television cameras from around the world as well as hundreds of supporters, teary campaign aides, members of his administration, reporters and friends, the mayor said confronting his ''limits'' had allowed him to see himself differently. ''You realize you're not a superman and you're just a human being.''He added: ''This is not the right time for me to run for office. If it were six months ago or it were a year from now or the timing were a little different, maybe it would be different. But it isn't different and that's the way life is.''The state Republican Party reacted with sympathy, but immediately pledged support for Representative Rick A. Lazio of Long Island as the choice to replace the mayor. Party leaders said they were worried about the race but relieved that Mr. Giuliani had made a decision after weeks of reviewing his options.''I understand and respect his decision to put his health first,'' said Gov. George E. Pataki. Mr. Lazio said Mr. Giuliani ''had the best interests of New Yorkers in mind,'' and he added that he was ready to run. ''I'm looking forward to this,'' he said.Mr. Lazio's pending entry and Mr. Giuliani's withdrawal instantly changed what had been an overheated, entertaining race of national interest into a more traditional campaign. City Hall, which in recent weeks has been a jangling nerve center, settled into a new calm after the mayor left shortly after 6 p.m.Mrs. Clinton, who telephoned the mayor shortly after his announcement, said afterward, ''I certainly hope and pray, as I know all New Yorkers do, that he will have a full and speedy recovery.'' Asked if she would miss the mayor as an opponent, Mrs. Clinton replied, ''Well, I think we should just wish him well as a person.''Mr. Giuliani's campaign and City Hall staffs greeted him with a standing ovation when he entered the news conference yesterday, and applauded him when he spoke of his mayoral successes. Many have been uneasy in recent days, as the mayor's deliberations generated uncertainty at City Hall and at his campaign headquarters.At the news conference, Mr. Giuliani said he had wavered in recent days on whether to stay in the race, and had been up much of Thursday night agonizing over his decision. But he said he finally reached it yesterday morning after speaking to a few close friends. Earlier on Thursday night, he appeared at a nationally televised town hall meeting at the 92nd Street Y in Manhattan, where he gave no indication of his intentions.''When I went in last night to the town hall meeting and I saw the people outside saying, 'Run, Rudy, run, Rudy, run, Rudy,' I had, you know, half the time last night I felt like I wanted to run,'' Mr. Giuliani said. ''And half the time I felt like I shouldn't do it.''I stayed up last night going back and forth about what's the right decision and what isn't the right decision. I believe this is the right decision. And I think somehow, somewhere, some way, this is all for the best.''Mr. Giuliani's life has been in a near-constant state of turmoil the last three weeks, much of it recorded by a persistent and expanding press corps. On April 27, the mayor announced that he had prostate cancer. On May 3, he said he had a ''very good'' friend, Judith Nathan. On May 10, he announced that he was seeking a separation from his wife, Donna Hanover. Ms. Hanover, who was surprised by the announcement, responded that same day by announcing that the couple's troubles had begun years earlier because of a relationship between her husband and a staff member.Ms. Hanover's press secretary identified the staff member as Cristyne Lategano-Nicholas, Mr. Giuliani's former director of communications, and said Ms. Hanover believed that the relationship had been intimate. Both the mayor and Ms. Lategano-Nicholas have denied that the relationship was sexual.Although Mr. Giuliani has been holding increasingly personal news conferences, in which he has ruminated openly about his life, he reached a new level of introspection with yesterday's announcement. ''I also believe that, you know, things happen in life for reasons that sometimes you only figure out afterwards,'' Mr. Giuliani said. ''And there is something good that comes out of this. A lot of good things come out of it. I think I understand myself a lot better. I think I understand what's important to me better.''But that ''doesn't mean there's going to be a new Rudy,'' the mayor said, making light of his frequently combative personality. ''I think that's silly.''Mr. Giuliani also sought to redefine the remaining months of his mayoralty, promising that he would try to embrace the minority groups he has alienated in the past. His administration, he said, will try to make sure that it ''accomplishes the goal of, you know, reaching every person that we can reach and making sure that every New Yorker feels that I'm dedicated to them, that I want to protect them, that I want to help them, and that I want my time as mayor to count for everybody.''Later, he said he wanted to figure out how he had placed a ''barrier'' between his administration and the city's minority residents. He also said, abruptly, that he wanted to increase the number of people covered by health insurance because of what he has been through. ''One of the things that I felt from the beginning of this and continue to feel is a tremendous sense of compassion for the people that have to make decisions like this alone,'' he said. ''One of the things maybe that I can do is figure out how we accelerate making sure that people are covered -- I mean, there are a lot of things that I think I can accomplish that I haven't accomplished before.''C. Virginia Fields, the Manhattan borough president, who has been a frequent critic of the mayor, said that she was ''very hopeful that he will, indeed, work to overcome the many barriers that face too many New Yorkers.'' The Rev. Al Sharpton, one of Mr. Giuliani's most vociferous critics, said that he wished Mr. Giuliani well, but that he did not see his withdrawal from the race ''as a political loss for the people of the state.'' Mr. Sharpton also said that he was now more inclined to run for mayor in 2001.Although Mr. Giuliani had repeatedly said in the days after announcing his illness that he would first make a decision on his cancer treatment and then decide on the race, he said yesterday that his thinking had been flawed.''I didn't organize this,'' he said. ''I mean, I didn't understand the impact of this. It was, what I thought at first was, O.K., I'll take a week or two, or three, whatever it takes, to figure out what the treatment is. I will then decide on the treatment, I'll then look at the treatment and I'll figure out, does that mean I can run or I can't run.'' Mr. Giuliani added, ''I know it sounds silly, but I thought of it like a budget decision or a legal decision.''But Mr. Giuliani said the decision, which could be either surgery to remove the prostate or radiation, had turned out to be far more difficult than he ever imagined -- in part, he said on Thursday, because of possible side effects. Although surgery is the choice of most men of Mr. Giuliani's age, which is 55, and has a high cure rate, it also causes impotence and incontinence in many patients. Doctors say that radiation, particularly in the form of ''seeds'' inserted into the prostate, has less effect on sexual function, but its long-term cure rates are not known.Although doctors said that Mr. Giuliani would have been physically able to continue in the race no matter what treatment he chose -- if he was willing to campaign part time over the summer -- Mr. Giuliani said yesterday that he did not want to run a race when he was not operating at 100 percent.''My concentration isn't going to be there,'' he said. He added that ''nobody can tell you in percentages what the side effects are going to be. You can be fine, you can be terrific, or you can have problems and then you won't be able to carry out your commitment.''The mayor said that he would continue to mull over his treatment options in the coming weeks, and that his decision would not be ''a political matter'' but a personal one. He said again, as he has repeatedly, that his decision not to run was based on his health, not on his unraveling marriage or personal problems.Joannie Danielides, Ms. Hanover's press secretary, said that the mayor telephoned his wife and informed her of his decision shortly before his announcement. Ms. Hanover recently hired Helene Brezinsky, a prominent Manhattan divorce lawyer.Both Ms. Hanover and Mr. Giuliani are living at Gracie Mansion while they work out a separation agreement.''They talked briefly,'' Ms. Danielides said. ''She's concerned for his health and will try to help him with that.''Before he made his announcement, Mr. Giuliani also informed Mr. Pataki; William D. Powers, the state Republican Party chairman; Trent Lott, the Senate majority leader; Senator John McCain and Gov. George W. Bush, whom Mr. Giuliani endorsed for president.''I told Rudy that I understood it was a very difficult decision for him to make, and our prayers are with him,'' Mr. Bush said. ''He is my friend whether he's the candidate or not for the United States Senate.''Mr. Giuliani told his staff of his decision shortly after his 11 a.m. radio call-in show on Friday, when senior members of his administration could be seen moving in and out of his office with grim faces. A short walk away, on Maiden Lane, the site of the Giuliani campaign headquarters, young volunteers were devastated. Bruce J. Teitelbaum, Mr. Giuliani's campaign manager, who had privately and consistently worried that Mr. Giuliani would withdraw, said he would go on vacation, and he began turning requests for interviews with the mayor over to Mr. Giuliani's City Hall press secretary, Sunny Mindel. ''The campaign is effectively over,'' he said.Although Mr. Giuliani said that he was ''pretty sure'' of his decision even before the radio show, he did not let on, even during a long, melancholy response to ''Eileen in Queens,'' who had called to say that she would vote for Mr. Giuliani, but not for Mr. Lazio if the mayor dropped out.The mayor thanked her, then said: ''Believe me, if you have ever faced a decision like this, you realize it is much deeper, it is much more difficult, it involves many more parts of you, involves every part of you, actually. And it involves you really calculating what are the most important things in your life.''At the close of Mr. Giuliani's announcement, a reporter asked the mayor if he felt closer to God.''I hope he's closer to me,'' he replied.THE MAYOR'S DECISION: THE OVERVIEW
To the Editor:Gov. George W. Bush of Texas should rectify the fact that he has never witnessed an execution by witnessing the next of the many executions he presides over as governor (front page, May 14).To the Editor:Gov. George W. Bush of Texas should rectify the fact that he has never witnessed an execution by witnessing the next of the many executions he presides over as governor (front page, May 14).Of course, he runs the risk of having the same response my father did at the age of 21 in the 1920's in West Virginia when he witnessed the hanging of a guilty man. He spent the rest of his long career as a newspaper editor opposing the bestiality of capital punishment.MARY-MARGARET SHARP PATTERSON  Chevy Chase, Md., May 17, 2000
Ariane Anthony took on Wallace Stevens and Samuel Beckett in ''Why Imagine Golden Birds?,'' a program of new and recent dances Ms. Anthony presented on Monday night at the Construction Company studio. Stevens is one of the least corporeal and most metaphorical of poets, with Beckett not far behind. But Ms. Anthony is a young choreographer of rare imagination and sureness. The dark iconic birds and coolly charged landscapes of Stevens's ''Thirteen Ways of Looking at a Blackbird'' came alive in purely physical terms, as did Beckett's ''man who saw himself rise and go'' in the prose poem ''Stirrings Still.''The evening's dedication, to the memory of Edward Gorey and Anna Sokolow, says much about Ms. Anthony's work, which merges the untethered fantasy of Gorey's drawn world with the unerring emotional accuracy of the best of Sokolow's dance plays. In her new ''Seeing I,'' the Beckett dance, a trio of drab men (Peter Campbell, Jackson Kent and Brendan McCall) sit, rise and move about a small space in a Magritte-like triplicate image of a single man dressed in brown trousers, suspenders, white shirt and brown shoes.Ariane Anthony took on Wallace Stevens and Samuel Beckett in ''Why Imagine Golden Birds?,'' a program of new and recent dances Ms. Anthony presented on Monday night at the Construction Company studio. Stevens is one of the least corporeal and most metaphorical of poets, with Beckett not far behind. But Ms. Anthony is a young choreographer of rare imagination and sureness. The dark iconic birds and coolly charged landscapes of Stevens's ''Thirteen Ways of Looking at a Blackbird'' came alive in purely physical terms, as did Beckett's ''man who saw himself rise and go'' in the prose poem ''Stirrings Still.''The evening's dedication, to the memory of Edward Gorey and Anna Sokolow, says much about Ms. Anthony's work, which merges the untethered fantasy of Gorey's drawn world with the unerring emotional accuracy of the best of Sokolow's dance plays. In her new ''Seeing I,'' the Beckett dance, a trio of drab men (Peter Campbell, Jackson Kent and Brendan McCall) sit, rise and move about a small space in a Magritte-like triplicate image of a single man dressed in brown trousers, suspenders, white shirt and brown shoes.Equally drab wooden chairs and a table appear and disappear in this suite of vignettes separated by blackouts. One man has a brief, quizzical encounter with a red rose. At another point Ms. Anthony deftly shifts perspective so that the audience seems to be looking down on the dancers. The overall effect is of a silent movie made into a dance.Ms. Anthony has chosen her collaborators well. Both ''Seeing I'' and her new ''Why Imagine Golden Birds?,'' the Stevens dance, are set to scores by John Stone that have all the quiet eccentricity and evocativeness of the choreography. (Mr. Stone also played the piano in musical interludes, with Jolle Greenleaf singing his songs.) Peter Wahlberg's set designs, which include projections of stark yet lyrical photographic skies and winter trees in ''Golden Birds,'' send the everyday into eerie orbit with all the mad logic of the dances.Christopher Fields, the costume designer for both pieces, does extraordinary things with dull little hats and black and white fabrics whose textures match the variety of ''Golden Bird.'' Sarah Sidman's subtly dramatic lighting enhances the pieces' look of small universes complete in themselves. And the skillful dancers -- in ''Golden Bird,'' Ms. Anthony, Amit Hadari, Natalie Desch, Andrea Thome, Mr. McCall and Mr. Kent -- are as quietly eccentric looking as the choreography.Ms. Anthony uses everything from simple calligraphic figures to a small crowd-buffeted woman and stylish young waltzers to embody, but not illustrate, Stevens's poem. One image is more startling than the next, but one never loses the sense of the poem's sere and solitary splendor. Hers is a gift to be cherished.DANCE REVIEW
California's decision in 1996 to outlaw the use of race in public college admissions was widely viewed as the beginning of the end for affirmative action at public universities all over the United States. But in the four years since Californians passed Proposition 209, most states have agreed that killing affirmative action outright would deepen social inequality by denying minority citizens access to higher education. The half-dozen states that are actually thinking about abandoning race-sensitive admissions policies are themselves finding that the only way to enlarge the minority presence in college without such policies is to improve dramatically the public schools that most black and Latino students attend.As a result, these states are keeping a close eye on California, Texas and Florida, where ''percentage systems'' have sprung up to replace affirmative action. Under these systems, students who achieve a specified ranking in their high school graduating classes are guaranteed admission to state colleges.California's decision in 1996 to outlaw the use of race in public college admissions was widely viewed as the beginning of the end for affirmative action at public universities all over the United States. But in the four years since Californians passed Proposition 209, most states have agreed that killing affirmative action outright would deepen social inequality by denying minority citizens access to higher education. The half-dozen states that are actually thinking about abandoning race-sensitive admissions policies are themselves finding that the only way to enlarge the minority presence in college without such policies is to improve dramatically the public schools that most black and Latino students attend.As a result, these states are keeping a close eye on California, Texas and Florida, where ''percentage systems'' have sprung up to replace affirmative action. Under these systems, students who achieve a specified ranking in their high school graduating classes are guaranteed admission to state colleges.In California, for example, the so-called 4 percent plan guarantees college admission to everyone in the top 4 percent of high school graduating classes statewide. Minority enrollment, which crashed after Proposition 209 passed, has rebounded at the second-tier colleges. But the decline has continued at the flagship colleges, U.C.L.A. and Berkeley -- largely because the high schools in black and Latino neighborhoods routinely fail to offer the advanced placement courses that are readily available in white neighborhoods and that are taken into account when the elite colleges make admissions decisions.The American Civil Liberties Union of Southern California has challenged this arrangement in a class-action lawsuit. Having eliminated the race-sensitive policies that once compensated for these inequalities, California is now being forced to deal with the inferior public schools that made those policies necessary.The University of Texas has learned a similar lesson since a federal court ruling forced it to abandon race-based admissions policies in 1996. Black and Latino enrollment dipped precipitously in the first year, but rose again after the legislature passed a law guaranteeing college admission to all students who graduate in the top 10 percent of any public high school class.A recent report from the United States Civil Rights Commission attributed this success to innovative recruiting, mentoring and tutoring programs. But the overwhelming lesson in Texas is that the public schools from which minority students come must be improved if these students are to perform at the top levels at the University of Texas. Texas now forces public schools to keep academic achievement records by race, and penalizes schools that allow black and Latino children to fall behind.Gov. Jeb Bush of Florida is currently embroiled in a fight over an executive order that outlaws race-based admissions at the state universities -- while guaranteeing admissions to the top 20 percent of high school classes. Mr. Bush's order was meant to render moot a ballot initiative on affirmative action that Republicans feared would heighten black turnout in this year's presidential election. The 20 percent rule seemed non-controversial and even generous -- until Governor Bush found that roughly two-thirds of additional black students who might benefit from the rule had been so neglected in high school that they had failed to graduate with the necessary credits for admission to the state university system. The state is now pushing public schools that serve black students to provide better course offerings.What all these states have learned is that the only real way to make race-sensitive policies unnecessary is to guarantee black and Latino children from poor communities a realistic chance at a decent education that prepares them for college. To kill the policies before those guarantees are in place is to court civic disaster.
THE DEMOCRATSA GETAWAY FOR THE GORES -- Vice President Al Gore and his wife, Tipper, escaped Washington yesterday to spend their 30th wedding anniversary at Bethany Beach in Delaware. The Gores were staying at the beach home of Tony Coelho, Mr. Gore's presidential campaign chairman, through Sunday. The couple took a Marine helicopter at taxpayer expense -- a requirement of the Secret Service, a spokesman said. Accompanying them were Mr. Gore's Secret Service detail, a military aide and a press aide, although the White House had not notified reporters of the vice president's travel until yesterday afternoon, after the Gores had left Washington. Mr. Gore last month had told reporters covering his presidential campaign that he would notify them when he traveled, including on his anniversary. ''I will err on the side of openness and full access as much as possible,'' he said. But he apparently had not shared this decision with his wife, who has said she hopes to maintain her family's privacy even if her husband becomes president and in a recent interview questioned why reporters would need to accompany the vice president on private trips.Katharine Q. Seelye (NYT)THE DEMOCRATSA GETAWAY FOR THE GORES -- Vice President Al Gore and his wife, Tipper, escaped Washington yesterday to spend their 30th wedding anniversary at Bethany Beach in Delaware. The Gores were staying at the beach home of Tony Coelho, Mr. Gore's presidential campaign chairman, through Sunday. The couple took a Marine helicopter at taxpayer expense -- a requirement of the Secret Service, a spokesman said. Accompanying them were Mr. Gore's Secret Service detail, a military aide and a press aide, although the White House had not notified reporters of the vice president's travel until yesterday afternoon, after the Gores had left Washington. Mr. Gore last month had told reporters covering his presidential campaign that he would notify them when he traveled, including on his anniversary. ''I will err on the side of openness and full access as much as possible,'' he said. But he apparently had not shared this decision with his wife, who has said she hopes to maintain her family's privacy even if her husband becomes president and in a recent interview questioned why reporters would need to accompany the vice president on private trips.Katharine Q. Seelye (NYT)THE REPUBLICANSBUSH IN KENTUCKY -- Wending his way across Kentucky on a campaign bus, Gov. George W. Bush took his ''compassionate conservatism'' on the road yesterday, calling on the elderly to volunteer. At a center for the elderly in Paducah, Mr. Bush praised retired volunteers who share ''wisdom, experience and values'' as foster grandparents or mentors. He proposed to increase federal financing for such volunteer programs from $183 million a year to $240 million annually across five years. Some of the money would go to a pilot program, under which 10,000 low-income elderly volunteers would earn a $1,000 scholarship for a grandchild or a child of their choice.Alison Mitchell (NYT)THE ISSUESGORE WEB SITE ATTACKS BUSH PLAN -- Certain that Governor Bush has handed them the perfect campaign weapon with his Social Security proposal, the Gore campaign unveiled a new Web site this week devoted to attacking his plan. Its not-so-subtle address: www.bushinsecurity.com. The home page features a photograph of rolling dice (Mr. Gore likes to accuse Mr. Bush of promoting ''casino economics'') and a picture of a slightly crazed-looking Mr. Bush over the caption, ''When he was asked if people could lose money under his plan, Bush replied, 'Maybe, maybe not.'' Asked to respond to the Web site, Ari Fleischer, Mr. Bush's spokesman, said, ''Having invented the Internet, you would have thought Al Gore could have used it for something positive and not just another attack barrage.'' He added that he would check the site to see whether it included a link to the White House Web site that promotes the Clinton administration's proposal to invest Social Security money in the stock market, an idea Mr. Gore once supported.James Dao (NYT)CONSERVATIVE NAMED TO N.R.A. BOARD -- Grover G. Norquist, president of a nonprofit anti-tax group called Americans for Tax Reform and a leader in conservative circles, has been elected to the board of the National Rifle Association, Mr. Norquist and N.R.A. officials said. Mr. Norquist has close ties to the Republican Party -- he is a friend of former Speaker Newt Gingrich and accepted $4.6 million in 1996 from the Republican National Committee to flood Congressional districts with literature defending Republican candidates. So his election is viewed by Democrats and gun-control advocates as further evidence of tightening bonds between the Republicans and the N.R.A., which he calls ''the nation's largest civil rights group.'' Joining him on the board will be David Keene, chairman of the American Conservative Union.James Dao (NYT)THE STATESEND OF POLITICAL WINDSTORM -- Richard A. Gebhardt, whose sound-alike primary challenge to the House minority leader, Representative Richard A. Gephardt, had Democrats in a tizzy in recent months, dropped his candidacy, a state spokesman announced yesterday. Mr. Gebhardt, 65, filed paperwork on Thursday withdrawing from the Third District primary and will not appear alongside the congressman on the Aug. 8 ballot, said Jim Grebing, a spokesman for Secretary of State Bekki Cook. ''I stirred up a lot of wind, didn't I?'' Mr. Gebhardt said with a laugh.(AP)THE 2000 CAMPAIGN
A week after hundreds of thousands of mothers demonstrated for gun control in the nation's capital, thousands of gun owners gathered here today for the National Rifle Association's 129th annual convention, vowing to fight new firearms restrictions and threatening to carry their pro-gun sentiments into voting booths this fall.As they tested the heft of 9 millimeter handguns and checked the scopes of hunting rifles in a dense forest of display booths on the exhibition floor, N.R.A. members time and again expressed the same sentiments: Stop portraying us as right-wing nuts. Crack down on criminals, not legal gun owners. And leave us, and our guns, alone.A week after hundreds of thousands of mothers demonstrated for gun control in the nation's capital, thousands of gun owners gathered here today for the National Rifle Association's 129th annual convention, vowing to fight new firearms restrictions and threatening to carry their pro-gun sentiments into voting booths this fall.As they tested the heft of 9 millimeter handguns and checked the scopes of hunting rifles in a dense forest of display booths on the exhibition floor, N.R.A. members time and again expressed the same sentiments: Stop portraying us as right-wing nuts. Crack down on criminals, not legal gun owners. And leave us, and our guns, alone.Ed Kelleher, 49, an N.R.A. member and a computer systems designer from West Columbia, S.C., said: ''We're in the midst of a concerted assault on gun owners. We're always being described as crazies. But look at me. I don't walk around with a gun in my hand and a knife in my teeth.''The N.R.A. has been perhaps the best example of a dynamic common to many special interest organizations: it flourishes amid adversity.Nearly broke and losing members in the mid-1990's, the group said it had gained nearly a million members, to a record 3.6 million, in the past year. Its leaders and members attribute that growth to the increasing prominence of gun control as a political issue, from the presidential race on down.David Sikorsky, 50, an engineer from High Point, N.C., said, ''I think Bill Clinton has been the best thing to happen to the N.R.A.''''And he's been terrific for gun sales,'' Mr. Sikorsky said. ''People really think he would try to take away their guns.''N.R.A. leaders have done their best to stoke the siege mentalities of members. The cover of a new N.R.A. magazine, America's First Freedom, features a drawing of a politician with Vice President Al Gore's face and President Clinton's hair.''He's Clinton to the Gore: The Face of Gun Hatred in America,'' reads the headline beside the drawing.And the organization's president, Charlton Heston, who is expected to be elected to a third term during the convention, kicked off the event with a passionate plea to members to make the November election a referendum on the right to bear arms.''This year holds the most important political elections in the history of our country,'' he said in a videotaped message. ''Our gun rights and the Second Amendment are truly in peril. As the sun rises on Nov. 8, who's won and who's lost will define the quality of freedom for the next century.''In keeping with the buoyantly defiant mood of its members, the N.R.A. announced plans today to open a theme store and restaurant in Times Square in New York City, which has some of the toughest gun laws in the country.Wayne LaPierre, N.R.A. executive vice president, said the store would sell hiking, camping and other outdoors equipment -- but not guns -- emblazoned with an N.R.A. logo. It will also have an arcade featuring ''virtual shooting'' games intended to promote target shooting and hunting, Mr. LaPierre said.A carnival atmosphere enveloped much of the convention, which N.R.A. officials said was expected to draw 40,000 people over three days.Inside on the sprawling exhibition floor, people checked out the latest in laser technology, vendors in rawhide vests and ten-gallon hats hawked replicas of six-shooters and men wearing camouflage caps fired at computer-simulated pheasants.Outside on the street, members of a gun owners' group, Grass Roots South Carolina, provided a bit of street theater for Second Amendment true believers. Before a white banner that said, ''Your Future Under Gun Control,'' four commandos dressed in military gear and armed with toy assault weapons attacked a blindfolded, flag-draped and, needless to say, unarmed, Lady Liberty.For all its campiness, the performance captured the sentiments of many people at the convention. Sometimes plaintively, sometimes angrily, they expressed frustration with what they considered the relentlessly hostile attitudes of gun-control advocates against gun owners.Many people said that individual gun regulations, on their own, were often not onerous. But piled one atop another, those regulations have become burdensome and aggravating. Most people interviewed at the convention said they had come to view any new gun restrictions as a first step toward the outlawing and confiscation of all weapons.Many said they were particularly worried about a central proposal of the Million Mom March: registering handguns and licensing handgun owners. Mr. Gore has endorsed licensing all new handgun owners, among an array of other gun regulations.''The plan on the other side is to put new laws on the books that aren't enforced so that they can say, 'These laws don't work,' '' said Thomas Lovelace, 69, a retired management consultant from Clifton, Va. ''Then they'll feel justified in confiscating our guns.''If there were Gore supporters in the crowd, they were not admitting it publicly. Just about everyone interviewed said they would vote for Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, the presumptive Republican presidential nominee. Mr. Bush has been a strong ally of the N.R.A. in Texas, but recently he has tried to put some distance between himself and the organization, clearly aware that he needs to win the votes of some moderate Democrats and independents in November.Still, N.R.A. officials say the group will almost certainly throw its resources behind Mr. Bush.But in this crowd, even Mr. Bush's strong record of supporting the N.R.A. was not always considered enough. Mr. Kelleher said he thought Mr. Bush would probably allow a gradual erosion of the rights of gun owners.''I'll vote for Bush, but I won't be that upset if he loses,'' he said.With its convention coming on the heels of the Million Mom March, and with gun-control advocates trying to cast the proposals as child safety measures, the N.R.A. was clearly trying to burnish its image as a family-oriented organization.A group of adolescent firearms enthusiasts was honored today, and there will be a workshop on women in the N.R.A. on Sunday. Mr. LaPierre used his opening speech to assert that recreational shooting is a ''friendly, wholesome, family'' sport.But for all that, the majority of conventioneers were white, older men. That said, one of the younger ones, 20-year-old Matthew Swaim of Robeson, N.C., was clearly in sync with his elders.''The way I see it, only armed people are free,'' he said after checking out some shiny new pistols at the Smith & Wesson booth.THE 2000 CAMPAIGN: THE GUN DEBATE
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's decision to drop out of the Senate race today may or may not turn out to be good for New York Republicans. But for one top Republican, Gov. George E. Pataki, there was no such ambiguity.Mr. Pataki much preferred Representative Rick A. Lazio of Long Island as the Republican candidate to oppose Hillary Rodham Clinton. He supported Mr. Giuliani a few months ago only because of a growing consensus among State Republican Party leaders that Mr. Giuliani would be Mrs. Clinton's strongest opponent.Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's decision to drop out of the Senate race today may or may not turn out to be good for New York Republicans. But for one top Republican, Gov. George E. Pataki, there was no such ambiguity.Mr. Pataki much preferred Representative Rick A. Lazio of Long Island as the Republican candidate to oppose Hillary Rodham Clinton. He supported Mr. Giuliani a few months ago only because of a growing consensus among State Republican Party leaders that Mr. Giuliani would be Mrs. Clinton's strongest opponent.In an interview today, Mr. Pataki said he believed that Mr. Lazio would ultimately be the party's choice to run against Mrs. Clinton. He described Mr. Lazio as a worthy candidate with a politically appealing record in Congress on issues like tax cuts and smaller government.''I think he will be a very strong candidate,'' Mr. Pataki said. ''He knows the issues. He has a knowledge of policy in Washington. He has a very different philosophy than Mrs. Clinton. He believes in what has worked in this state.''Mr. Pataki also tried to cut off speculation that he might enter the race himself, saying that he is happy to remain in his current job and support whoever becomes the Republican Party's candidate. ''I think governor is one of the great jobs, and I love New York,'' Mr. Pataki said.But many Republican officials interviewed today expressed some disappointment that Mr. Pataki has refused to jump into the race, saying that he is probably the strongest candidate the party has at this point.Kemp Hannon, a Republican State Senator from Nassau County, said he had mixed feelings about Mr. Pataki's decision to stay out of the race. On the one hand, he said, the governor would pose a daunting challenge for Mrs. Clinton, given his statewide stature. But Mr. Hannon added that the governor's absence from Albany would be a major loss for the state and the party.''He would be the strongest candidate,'' Mr. Hannon said. ''But people support his policies in Albany and want to keep him as governor.''Another Republican senator put the matter more bluntly. ''We would love the governor to run because he is by far the best candidate,'' the senator said, speaking on condition of anonymity. ''There is no question that he would be the party's first choice, possibly even before Rudy.''Mr. Pataki, the de facto head of the state party, is formidable in many respects. He is the most successful fund-raiser in state history, and has won two statewide races in a largely Democratic state. He has also kept his political operation running at a feverish pace in a nonelection year, raising $3.2 million since 1999 through three political action committees he has established.The governor has used the money to raise his profile nationally. He has hired nationally known political consultants like Benjamin L. Ginsberg, an elections specialist and Washington lawyer who serves as a campaign adviser to Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, and Stephen Moore, an economist with the Cato Institute in Washington.But Mr. Pataki has good reason to want to stay put. If Mr. Pataki stepped down as governor, he would forfeit his annual state salary of $177,984 a year and any additional income that he earns from outside activities. He received $48,000 for three speeches he gave last year, and $50,000 for speeches he gave in 1998. He also received $24,000 for his autobiography. His salary would be considerably less in Washington, where rank-and-file members earn about $140,000 a year.As governor, Mr. Pataki also appoints hundreds of people to important positions in state government -- people who, in turn, could return the favor in a number of ways, including volunteering in the governor's campaign and raising funds for him. As senator, he would be entitled to make only a couple of dozen appointments.The governor's job also gives Mr. Pataki the status of the unchallenged boss of the state party, not to mention control over a $77 billion-a-year enterprise full of jobs and lucrative contracts that can be awarded to friends. United States senators rarely get that kind of power, either in their own party or in the day-to-day affairs of government.That said, Mr. Pataki has shown some interest in leaving Albany. Last year, for example, he gave a series of speeches around the country in an effort to bolster his national stature. Mr. Pataki was widely seen as vying for a spot on the Republicans' national ticket, possibly as a vice presidential candidate.But today, Mr. Pataki tried to dispel any notion that he was seeking a job in Washington, including a cabinet post in a new Republican administration. ''Right now, I see myself in New York,'' he said in an interview. ''If I were looking in Washington, I would have taken a harder look at the Senate race.''THE MAYOR'S DECISION: THE GOVERNOR
A Republican senator has singlehandedly blocked the United States from paying $368 million that it owes the United Nations for four difficult peacekeeping missions, infuriating the Clinton administration and some of its allies.The dispute is the latest skirmish in a running battle between an administration that has used American power and money abroad in operations short of war and a Republican-led Congress that disdains many of those missions.A Republican senator has singlehandedly blocked the United States from paying $368 million that it owes the United Nations for four difficult peacekeeping missions, infuriating the Clinton administration and some of its allies.The dispute is the latest skirmish in a running battle between an administration that has used American power and money abroad in operations short of war and a Republican-led Congress that disdains many of those missions.The senator, Judd Gregg of New Hampshire, has used his power as chairman of the Senate Appropriations Subcommittee to stop the State Department from transferring the money -- already approved by Congress -- to the United Nations for missions in Congo, East Timor, Kosovo and Sierra Leone.Administration officials said unless the money was released, the United Nations' ability to undertake such missions, already frayed, might break down. The forces may lack gasoline and electricity in Kosovo, face difficult delays in their imminent and potentially dangerous Congo mission, and go unpaid in Sierra Leone, United Nations and administration officials said.Mr. Gregg objects most strongly to the Sierra Leone operation. He said in an interview he would not lift his block until the situation there had changed. ''I'm not going to pay for a policy that's unethical and, as it turns out, barbaric,'' Mr. Gregg said.He was referring to a peace agreement signed in July by the combatants in Sierra Leone's eight-year-old civil war. The accord gave amnesty and a share of power to rebels who had terrorized civilians, murdering, raping and mutilating thousands. The rebels, whose leader, Foday Sankoh, was arrested this week in Sierra Leone, have held hostage hundreds of United Nations soldiers sent to try to stop the violence.Mr. Gregg, like many of his Republican colleagues in Congress, has a low opinion of peacekeeping in particular and President Clinton's foreign policies in general.''I do not think this administration has been engaged in a coherent way,'' he said. ''They have made very bad decisions.''As head of the subcommittee that governs the State Department budget, Mr. Gregg can block money for foreign policy without hearings, debate or votes.That power is ''unique to appropriations chairmen,'' Mr. Gregg said. He has refused to let the department transfer hundreds of millions of dollars to help pay for the four operations that he finds objectionable.He placed a hold on $96 million for the Sierra Leone force; $181 million for East Timor, where United Nations troops are trying to maintain order on a island ravaged by forces that oppose the newly won independence from Indonesia; $50 million for Kosovo, where the troops are policing towns and cities to halt ethnic conflict; and $41 million for Congo, where soldiers are starting to set up a system to monitor a cease-fire.The under secretary general for peacekeeping operations at the United Nations, Bernard Miyet, said the United States' refusal to pay for the Sierra Leone mission was felt directly by third world nations that have sent troops.''Most of the countries involved are poor countries making human and financial sacrifices,'' Mr. Miyet said. ''The burden for Sierra Leone falls on India, Bangladesh, Jordan, Nigeria, Kenya, Ghana and Guinea, all countries in dire need of money. There have been difficulties in certain African countries,'' because the forces have not been paid on time.Mr. Miyet and several administration officials said the lack of money in Congo might slow the creation of communications networks, a system to control air traffic, improved roads and livable barracks.''In Kosovo,'' Mr. Miyet said, ''we might have difficulty paying our personnel, in particular the 3,700 policemen'' who are trying to maintain law and order and who work alongside a large contingent of NATO troops.Administration officials said the Kosovo mission also faced logistical problems like paying for gasoline and electricity.''And in Timor,'' he added, ''we might have difficulty reimbursing countries'' that have provided the troops.The under secretary general for management, Joseph E. Connor, said the United Nations owed $800 million to troops on peacekeeping missions in the last 10 years. ''Many member states are saying, 'Don't call us until you're ready to send the check,' '' Mr. Connor said.The United States now owes the United Nations $1.77 billion. Most of that bill is for peacekeeping.The United States is supposed to pay at least 25 percent of the peacekeeping costs. It now owes the United Nations $1.3 billion for past and present missions, Mr. Connor said. The bill has been increasing since Jan. 1, largely as a consequence of Mr. Gregg's block, he said. The United States also owes $468 million in membership dues, Mr. Connor added.Richard C. Holbrooke, the American ambassador to the United Nations, traveled to Africa this month as part of a Security Council delegation that paved the way for the Congo mission to begin. He declined a request for an interview today. Other administration officials said they were angry and embarrassed about the situation.''It really throws a spanner in the works,'' one said. ''When the U.N. sees the U.S. Congress is reluctant to pay the bills, they are less inclined to go along with U.S. leadership.''Another administration official said, ''It undermines the capacity of the U.N. to do its job and undermines our credibility to argue that we are serious about enhancing the peacekeeping ability of the U.N.''The officials were loath to criticize Mr. Gregg, fearing that he would block more money or cut the State Department budget.Pat M. Holt, a member of the staff of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee for 27 years, called the system that let a single member block spending that the entire Congress had appropriated a scandal.''It has no basis in law or Senate rules or history,'' Ms. Holt said.Law and tradition dictate that if an administration deviates in its spending from the program it presented to Congress, it has to report the changes to the appropriations committees. But ''this morphed into a system in which members and staff can object and the gutless wonders downtown don't dare disagree,'' Mr. Holt said.Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, whom Mr. Gregg strongly supported in the New Hampshire presidential primary, has not addressed blocking the peacekeeping money, said Condoleeza Rice, Mr. Bush's chief foreign policy adviser. ''Obviously,'' Ms. Rice said, ''the administration has some very hard work to do with Congress over the peacekeeping issue.''Correction:  May 23, 2000, Tuesday  Because of an editing error, a front-page article on Saturday about Senator Judd Gregg's blocking of money owed by the United States to the United Nations for peacekeeping referred incorrectly at one point to a staff member of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee who commented. The staff member, Pat M. Holt, is a man.Correction: May 23, 2000, TuesdayBecause of an editing error, a front-page article on Saturday about Senator Judd Gregg's blocking of money owed by the United States to the United Nations for peacekeeping referred incorrectly at one point to a staff member of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee who commented. The staff member, Pat M. Holt, is a man.<br>
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani withdrew from the most celebrated Senate race in the nation yesterday, saying that his health and his still-undecided treatment for prostate cancer were more important to him than his campaign against Hillary Rodham Clinton.In an emotional, riveting news conference, which he began in an uncharacteristically nervous voice, Mr. Giuliani said he wanted to devote his remaining 18 months in office to becoming a better mayor -- one who reaches out to minorities -- as well as becoming a better person. He took his listeners along on a psychological journey, holding out the possibility that his illness had changed him.Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani withdrew from the most celebrated Senate race in the nation yesterday, saying that his health and his still-undecided treatment for prostate cancer were more important to him than his campaign against Hillary Rodham Clinton.In an emotional, riveting news conference, which he began in an uncharacteristically nervous voice, Mr. Giuliani said he wanted to devote his remaining 18 months in office to becoming a better mayor -- one who reaches out to minorities -- as well as becoming a better person. He took his listeners along on a psychological journey, holding out the possibility that his illness had changed him.''I used to think the core of me was in politics, probably,'' Mr. Giuliani said. ''It isn't. When you feel your mortality and your humanity you realize that, that the core of you is first of all being able to take care of your health.'' [Page A14]A short time later in his half-hour of remarks in the City Hall Public Hearing Room, which was crowded with more than 35 television cameras from around the world as well as hundreds of supporters, teary campaign aides, members of his administration, reporters and friends, the mayor said confronting his ''limits'' had allowed him to see himself differently. ''You realize you're not a superman and you're just a human being.''He added: ''This is not the right time for me to run for office. If it were six months ago or it were a year from now or the timing were a little different, maybe it would be different. But it isn't different and that's the way life is.''The state Republican Party reacted with sympathy, but immediately pledged support for Representative Rick A. Lazio of Long Island as the choice to replace the mayor. Party leaders said they were worried about the race but relieved that Mr. Giuliani had made a decision after weeks of reviewing his options.''I understand and respect his decision to put his health first,'' said Gov. George E. Pataki. Mr. Lazio said Mr. Giuliani ''had the best interests of New Yorkers in mind,'' and he added that he was ready to run. ''I'm looking forward to this,'' he said.Mr. Lazio's pending entry and Mr. Giuliani's withdrawal instantly changed what had been an overheated, entertaining race of national interest into a more traditional campaign. City Hall, which in recent weeks has been a jangling nerve center, settled into a new calm after the mayor left shortly after 6 p.m.Mrs. Clinton, who telephoned the mayor shortly after his announcement, said afterward, ''I certainly hope and pray, as I know all New Yorkers do, that he will have a full and speedy recovery.'' Asked if she would miss the mayor as an opponent, Mrs. Clinton replied, ''Well, I think we should just wish him well as a person.''Mr. Giuliani's campaign and City Hall staffs greeted him with a standing ovation when he entered the news conference yesterday, and applauded him when he spoke of his mayoral successes. Many have been uneasy in recent days, as the mayor's deliberations generated uncertainty at City Hall and at his campaign headquarters.At the news conference, Mr. Giuliani said he had wavered in recent days on whether to stay in the race, and had been up much of Thursday night agonizing over his decision. But he said he finally reached it yesterday morning after speaking to a few close friends. Earlier on Thursday night, he appeared at a nationally televised town hall meeting at the 92nd Street Y in Manhattan, where he gave no indication of his intentions.''When I went in last night to the town hall meeting and I saw the people outside saying, 'Run, Rudy, run, Rudy, run, Rudy,' I had, you know, half the time last night I felt like I wanted to run,'' Mr. Giuliani said. ''And half the time I felt like I shouldn't do it.''I stayed up last night going back and forth about what's the right decision and what isn't the right decision. I believe this is the right decision. And I think somehow, somewhere, some way, this is all for the best.''Mr. Giuliani's life has been in a near-constant state of turmoil the last three weeks, much of it recorded by a persistent and expanding press corps. On April 27, the mayor announced that he had prostate cancer. On May 3, he said he had a ''very good'' friend, Judith Nathan. On May 10, he announced that he was seeking a separation from his wife, Donna Hanover. Ms. Hanover, who was surprised by the announcement, responded that same day by announcing that the couple's troubles had begun years earlier because of a relationship between her husband and a staff member.Ms. Hanover's press secretary identified the staff member as Cristyne Lategano-Nicholas, Mr. Giuliani's former director of communications, and said Ms. Hanover believed that the relationship had been intimate. Both the mayor and Ms. Lategano-Nicholas have denied that the relationship was sexual.Although Mr. Giuliani has been holding increasingly personal news conferences, in which he has ruminated openly about his life, he reached a new level of introspection with yesterday's announcement. ''I also believe that, you know, things happen in life for reasons that sometimes you only figure out afterwards,'' Mr. Giuliani said. ''And there is something good that comes out of this. A lot of good things come out of it. I think I understand myself a lot better. I think I understand what's important to me better.''But that ''doesn't mean there's going to be a new Rudy,'' the mayor said, making light of his frequently combative personality. ''I think that's silly.''Mr. Giuliani also sought to redefine the remaining months of his mayoralty, promising that he would try to embrace the minority groups he has alienated in the past. His administration, he said, will try to make sure that it ''accomplishes the goal of, you know, reaching every person that we can reach and making sure that every New Yorker feels that I'm dedicated to them, that I want to protect them, that I want to help them, and that I want my time as mayor to count for everybody.''Later, he said he wanted to figure out how he had placed a ''barrier'' between his administration and the city's minority residents. He also said, abruptly, that he wanted to increase the number of people covered by health insurance because of what he has been through. ''One of the things that I felt from the beginning of this and continue to feel is a tremendous sense of compassion for the people that have to make decisions like this alone,'' he said. ''One of the things maybe that I can do is figure out how we accelerate making sure that people are covered -- I mean, there are a lot of things that I think I can accomplish that I haven't accomplished before.''C. Virginia Fields, the Manhattan borough president, who has been a frequent critic of the mayor, said that she was ''very hopeful that he will, indeed, work to overcome the many barriers that face too many New Yorkers.'' The Rev. Al Sharpton, one of Mr. Giuliani's most vociferous critics, said that he wished Mr. Giuliani well, but that he did not see his withdrawal from the race ''as a political loss for the people of the state.'' Mr. Sharpton also said that he was now more inclined to run for mayor in 2001.Although Mr. Giuliani had repeatedly said in the days after announcing his illness that he would first make a decision on his cancer treatment and then decide on the race, he said yesterday that his thinking had been flawed.''I didn't organize this,'' he said. ''I mean, I didn't understand the impact of this. It was, what I thought at first was, O.K., I'll take a week or two, or three, whatever it takes, to figure out what the treatment is. I will then decide on the treatment, I'll then look at the treatment and I'll figure out, does that mean I can run or I can't run.'' Mr. Giuliani added, ''I know it sounds silly, but I thought of it like a budget decision or a legal decision.''But Mr. Giuliani said the decision, which could be either surgery to remove the prostate or radiation, had turned out to be far more difficult than he ever imagined -- in part, he said on Thursday, because of possible side effects. Although surgery is the choice of most men of Mr. Giuliani's age, which is 55, and has a high cure rate, it also causes impotence and incontinence in many patients. Doctors say that radiation, particularly in the form of ''seeds'' inserted into the prostate, has less effect on sexual function, but its long-term cure rates are not known.Although doctors said that Mr. Giuliani would have been physically able to continue in the race no matter what treatment he chose -- if he was willing to campaign part time over the summer -- Mr. Giuliani said yesterday that he did not want to run a race when he was not operating at 100 percent.''My concentration isn't going to be there,'' he said. He added that ''nobody can tell you in percentages what the side effects are going to be. You can be fine, you can be terrific, or you can have problems and then you won't be able to carry out your commitment.''The mayor said that he would continue to mull over his treatment options in the coming weeks, and that his decision would not be ''a political matter'' but a personal one. He said again, as he has repeatedly, that his decision not to run was based on his health, not on his unraveling marriage or personal problems.Joannie Danielides, Ms. Hanover's press secretary, said that the mayor telephoned his wife and informed her of his decision shortly before his announcement. Ms. Hanover recently hired Helene Brezinsky, a prominent Manhattan divorce lawyer.Both Ms. Hanover and Mr. Giuliani are living at Gracie Mansion while they work out a separation agreement.''They talked briefly,'' Ms. Danielides said. ''She's concerned for his health and will try to help him with that.''Before he made his announcement, Mr. Giuliani also informed Mr. Pataki; William D. Powers, the state Republican Party chairman; Trent Lott, the Senate majority leader; Senator John McCain and Gov. George W. Bush, whom Mr. Giuliani endorsed for president.''I told Rudy that I understood it was a very difficult decision for him to make, and our prayers are with him,'' Mr. Bush said. ''He is my friend whether he's the candidate or not for the United States Senate.''Mr. Giuliani told his staff of his decision shortly after his 11 a.m. radio call-in show on Friday, when senior members of his administration could be seen moving in and out of his office with grim faces. A short walk away, on Maiden Lane, the site of the Giuliani campaign headquarters, young volunteers were devastated. Bruce J. Teitelbaum, Mr. Giuliani's campaign manager, who had privately and consistently worried that Mr. Giuliani would withdraw, said he would go on vacation, and he began turning requests for interviews with the mayor over to Mr. Giuliani's City Hall press secretary, Sunny Mindel. ''The campaign is effectively over,'' he said.Although Mr. Giuliani said that he was ''pretty sure'' of his decision even before the radio show, he did not let on, even during a long, melancholy response to ''Eileen in Queens,'' who had called to say that she would vote for Mr. Giuliani, but not for Mr. Lazio if the mayor dropped out.The mayor thanked her, then said: ''Believe me, if you have ever faced a decision like this, you realize it is much deeper, it is much more difficult, it involves many more parts of you, involves every part of you, actually. And it involves you really calculating what are the most important things in your life.''At the close of Mr. Giuliani's announcement, a reporter asked the mayor if he felt closer to God.''I hope he's closer to me,'' he replied.THE MAYOR'S DECISION: THE OVERVIEW
The Selling of''Free Trade''Nafta, Washington, and the Subversionof American Democracy.By John R. MacArthur.388 pp. New York:Hill & Wang. $25.The Selling of''Free Trade''Nafta, Washington, and the Subversionof American Democracy.By John R. MacArthur.388 pp. New York:Hill & Wang. $25.You would have to go back to the 19th century to find a trade battle in Congress that was as divisive as that over the North American Free Trade Agreement in 1993. What has been needed is a dispassionate study that gets past the sound and fury. John R. MacArthur's study, ''The Selling of 'Free Trade,' ''is not really that. It mixes a passionate attack on the treaty with a journalistic account of its passage and effects. Die-hard opponents of the agreement will probably like this book. Others may find it irritatingly one-sided.Nafta emerged from at least three different impulses: first, Mexican officials, frightened by a growing foreign debt that was crippling their economy, wanted to attract American investment; second, American businesses wanted to be able to invest in Mexico free from export restrictions and domestic content rules, and from the ultimate threat of expropriation; and third, American officials and policy makers, worried about political instability and a torrent of illegal immigrants, wanted to incorporate Mexico into a Common Market-type arrangement that would lead to the revival of its economy, the reform of its government and the reduction of cross-border tensions.MacArthur understands the first two impulses. He understands that Nafta was primarily an investment agreement rather than a free trade treaty. But he plays down or ignores Americans' broader concerns. Nafta, he insists, was ''entirely about money.''MacArthur, the president and publisher of Harper's Magazine, is at his best describing the lobbying that occurred after the treaty was signed and went to Congress in August 1993. He shows how business lobbyists worked hand in glove with the treaty's Congressional supporters. But he has surprisingly little to say about the negotiations themselves, or about the domestic political conflicts that occurred while the treaty was being negotiated. His account of these tends to render shades of gray as black. When the Bush administration proposed that Congress agree to a fast-track vote (up or down without amendments), Richard Gephardt, the House majority leader and a Democrat, backed Bush on the condition that the treaty contain rules on labor standards and environmental protection. MacArthur dismisses this position as nave and opportunistic. (Gephardt ''was presumably ambitious to be liked by the sort of people, honest or not, who can make you president.'')A year later, during the presidential campaign, Bill Clinton, under the influence of Gephardt and two advisers, Derek Shearer and Richard Rothstein, adopted the same position. MacArthur treats Clinton even more contemptuously than he does Gephardt. He says Clinton ''had already made up his mind on trade to the point where there was no substantial difference between his position and Bush's.'' Clinton's stand, he says, was primarily based on fund-raising. That assertion leaves little middle ground between those adamantly opposed to Nafta and those enthusiastically in favor. MacArthur may be right, but when I covered the negotiations I found otherwise.In the Nafta negotiations, Clinton and Mickey Kantor, the United States trade representative, earnestly attempted to get Mexico and Canada to agree to set up commissions that would have significant punitive powers. They failed, primarily because of Mexican and Canadian opposition, as well as opposition from the Business Roundtable and Republicans in Congress. But they also failed because the A.F.L.-C.I.O., instead of trying to work with the administration, took a position of unequivocal opposition to the treaty in any form. Clinton and Gephardt found themselves caught between business-style internationalism and labor protectionism.The resulting treaty was flawed. MacArthur's view, which also became Gephardt's, was that it should have been rejected, but MacArthur now criticizes Gephardt and John Sweeney, the A.F.L.-C.I.O. president, for failing to press for Nafta's repeal on the grounds that it has worsened the condition of Mexican and American workers. In drawing this conclusion, MacArthur ignores two important considerations.He acknowledges that Mexico was in difficult straits on the eve of Nafta, but he attributes these problems to the Mexican government's abandonment of older high-tariff import substitution policies. Under these policies, MacArthur writes, there was ''less social inequality and more purchasing power for the average Mexican.'' But he fails to note that before the 1980's, the Mexican economy was propped up by oil earnings. When oil prices began to fall, the economy began to stagger, and it is still not on its feet. Nafta may not have improved Mexico's economy, but it is not clear that it has made things worse.The second consideration has to do with the impact of American investment in Mexico on American jobs. Investment increased somewhat after Nafta was signed, but the boom in American investment in Mexico predated Nafta. And if that investment had not gone to Mexico, it might have ended up in Central America or Asia, not in the United States. If Nafta depressed American wages, it did so indirectly -- by giving credibility to corporate managers' threats that if a union organized or demanded too much for its workers, the company would move to Mexico. Modifying Nafta to strengthen its labor and environmental commissions could benefit both American and Mexican workers, but repealing the treaty doesn't hold any obvious promise for Mexico, the United States or Canada.To MacArthur's credit, he has tried his best to make a potentially dull subject interesting by treating himself as a character in his narrative; by interspersing long interviews with lobbyists, politicians and affected workers; and by telling the story of one factory in New York that was affected by Nafta. But he is not the most artful author, and the book sometimes drags. It would have been much more lively at half the length. But it probably would not have been any more accurate a portrayal of the choices facing American policy makers and citizens in 1993.John B. Judis is a senior editor at The New Republic and the author of ''The Paradox of American Democracy.''
You've got to believe that the old man, wherever he is now, enjoyed his own funeral Mass. The climax was Cardinal Bernard Law's eulogy to the career and mission of Cardinal John O'Connor. ''What a great legacy he has left us in his constant reminder that the church must always be unambiguously pro-life,'' Law said, his strong Brahmin voice resonating throughout the nave. And then, after a stunned pause, the applause grew, first from the back of the cathedral, then spreading to the front, as the assorted politicians found themselves rising uncomfortably to the occasion. I doubt if Cardinal O'Connor had ever made more people less comfortable in his lifetime. And it wasn't for lack of trying.What O'Connor meant by ''pro-life'' was all-encompassing. He was as opposed to abortion as he was to the death penalty, and after the late Cardinal Bernardin of Chicago, he was perhaps the most effective exponent of that position in recent memory. For O'Connor, as for the current pope, life is life is life. From conception to natural death, our first duty is to defend it. Where there's legitimate doubt about exactly what kind of life it is -- the life of an unborn child or a senile invalid or a convicted murderer -- we should always veer toward the side of clemency. To do otherwise is to play God, or to risk a subtle cheapening of human life that can in turn lead to a deeper disregard for it. Treat a fetus as disposable, and before too long the mentally handicapped or terminally ill will see their own right to life as negotiable as well.You've got to believe that the old man, wherever he is now, enjoyed his own funeral Mass. The climax was Cardinal Bernard Law's eulogy to the career and mission of Cardinal John O'Connor. ''What a great legacy he has left us in his constant reminder that the church must always be unambiguously pro-life,'' Law said, his strong Brahmin voice resonating throughout the nave. And then, after a stunned pause, the applause grew, first from the back of the cathedral, then spreading to the front, as the assorted politicians found themselves rising uncomfortably to the occasion. I doubt if Cardinal O'Connor had ever made more people less comfortable in his lifetime. And it wasn't for lack of trying.What O'Connor meant by ''pro-life'' was all-encompassing. He was as opposed to abortion as he was to the death penalty, and after the late Cardinal Bernardin of Chicago, he was perhaps the most effective exponent of that position in recent memory. For O'Connor, as for the current pope, life is life is life. From conception to natural death, our first duty is to defend it. Where there's legitimate doubt about exactly what kind of life it is -- the life of an unborn child or a senile invalid or a convicted murderer -- we should always veer toward the side of clemency. To do otherwise is to play God, or to risk a subtle cheapening of human life that can in turn lead to a deeper disregard for it. Treat a fetus as disposable, and before too long the mentally handicapped or terminally ill will see their own right to life as negotiable as well.Advocates of this ''seamless garment of life'' argument (the phrase was Bernardin's) can point to public opinion polls to show how the issues of abortion and the death penalty are related. Since the 1960's, support for legal abortion and the death penalty have tracked each other closely. Between 1972 and 1974, for example, the moment Roe v. Wade initiated the era of mass abortion in America, support for the death penalty also rose by 10 percent. Pure coincidence? According to the General Social Survey of the University of Michigan, Americans who opposed all legal abortion in recent years were twice as likely as other Americans to oppose the death penalty. On the other hand, those supporting legal abortion in every circumstance -- the abortion-rights absolutists -- were the group least likely to oppose capital punishment. It's just another area of life where the old right-left paradigm doesn't quite work anymore.At least in theory. In practice, politicians holding the consistent life-life position are as rare as they are gutsy. In the House of Representatives, I have been able to find only one man -- Representative Chris Smith of New Jersey -- who publicly opposes both abortion and the death penalty in principle and has a voting record to prove it. Among the other 30 to 40 anti-abortion Democrats, I couldn't find any with an unequivocal record against capital punishment. In the punditariat, I know of only two major writers, Nat Hentoff and Christopher Hitchens, who have doggedly resisted the pressure of their liberal allies and stuck to their life-life convictions. In the broader political arena, Pat Robertson, to his credit, has recently succumbed to doubts about the death penalty and called for a moratorium. But Robertson, like Illinois's governor, George Ryan, wants a moratorium only because he is concerned that some innocent people are being executed, not because he thinks it is wrong to kill under any circumstance.Others on the right hold more confused views. George W. Bush supports a constitutional amendment to ban abortion in most cases, and yet as governor of Texas he has personally signed the death warrants of more than 120 people -- about a sixth of all the condemned prisoners executed since capital punishment was revived in the 1970's. In an interview with Talk magazine last year, he even made fun of one of the victims of Texas' death row, Karla Fay Tucker, mocking her pleas for mercy. And despite growing DNA evidence of the innocence of many death-row convicts across the country, Bush has shown not even a glimmer of concern that the Texas judicial system might be flawed. Or take the vociferously anti-abortion representative Henry Hyde. Two years ago, Hyde said: ''I look for the common thread in slavery, the Holocaust and abortion. To me, the common thread is dehumanizing people.'' And yet Hyde has personally championed legislation that significantly curtails the judicial review of death-row appeals. Even Alan Keyes, that peerless defender of unborn life, turns out to be a supporter of criminals' deaths. He said earlier this year, ''I think that there are circumstances under which it is essential . . . that we have and apply the death penalty in order to send a clear moral message to people throughout our society that we will not tolerate that kind of disrespect for life.'' In other words, if you want to support life, enforce death.Liberals have honed a different compromise. The American Civil Liberties Union passionately supports the right of women to abort their potential children and vehemently opposes the right of government to execute proved murderers. That's also the position of the National Organization for Women, The New Republic and the New York Times editorial page. Liberals, of course, insist that they are not inconsistent, because they believe a fetus is not a person, while a criminal clearly is. But even if a fetus is not a person, is it not in some sense alive? And shouldn't any form of human life be worthy of at least some moral weight in a decision about its own life or death? It's also true that in a just conviction a criminal is guilty of murder, while a fetus in a legal abortion is guilty of nothing. Should culpability play no role in the question of who gets to die -- or are only the criminals worthy of empathy? And if part of the opposition to the death penalty springs from its physical cruelty, as it surely should, then how exactly can many death-penalty opponents support what some activists have called ''partial-birth abortion,'' a procedure that makes the electric chair seem positively comfy? Yet several Catholic senators are uncomfortable with giving a lethal injection to a criminal but defend crushing the skull of a viable partly born fetus. Go figure.Bill Clinton's signal contribution to this debate was to construct a new and powerful centrist position. Call it ''double death.'' Double-deathers consistently back the right to abort and the right to execute. Clinton twice vetoed legislation that would have banned late-term abortion, and famously interrupted his election campaign in 1992 to approve the execution of a mentally incapacitated prisoner in Arkansas. For Clinton, and other double-deathers, this combo has a powerful political rationale. The formula signals to the feminist left that Clinton is one of them (can I have your check now, please?), and it signals to the centrist right that he's not Michael Dukakis (can I have your vote now, please?). Under Clinton, execution rates have duly soared, the federal death penalty has been extended to a broadening array of crimes and the legal right to abort a fetus has become Democratic Party gospel. Clinton's heir, Al Gore, once had moral qualms about abortion. But he's a quick study and is now an absolutist defender of abortion rights and a fervent supporter of capital punishment. The same goes for Rudy Giuliani, whose commitment to the legality of certain kinds of killing has made him as tenacious a double-deather as Hillary Clinton.No wonder they squirmed in their pews. Life, after all, is a precious and precarious thing. But nothing as precarious as a politician's consistency.
In a rousing speech to an A.F.L.-C.I.O. convention in New Jersey, Vice President Gore used the attack word secret seven times. It is now his favorite adjective, having temporarily replaced risky (as in the phrase, pronounced as one word, riskytaxscheme).He was blazing away at Governor Bush's proposal, not yet detailed, to allow individuals to divert a portion of their Social Security taxes into the stock market. Gore charged that Bush believed ''it would be best not to let you, the voters of this country, in on the secret plan before the election. . . . He is suppressing the details of how his plan would work and refusing to divulge what his secret plan really is.'' At a subsequent news conference, he evidently felt that secret was not pejorative enough and added, redundantly, a ''private secret plan.''In a rousing speech to an A.F.L.-C.I.O. convention in New Jersey, Vice President Gore used the attack word secret seven times. It is now his favorite adjective, having temporarily replaced risky (as in the phrase, pronounced as one word, riskytaxscheme).He was blazing away at Governor Bush's proposal, not yet detailed, to allow individuals to divert a portion of their Social Security taxes into the stock market. Gore charged that Bush believed ''it would be best not to let you, the voters of this country, in on the secret plan before the election. . . . He is suppressing the details of how his plan would work and refusing to divulge what his secret plan really is.'' At a subsequent news conference, he evidently felt that secret was not pejorative enough and added, redundantly, a ''private secret plan.''That sinister phrase -- secret plan -- has resonance to veteran rhetoricians and students of presidential campaigns. In the 1968 primaries, candidate Richard Nixon was searching for a way to promise he would extricate the U.S. from its increasingly unpopular involvement in Vietnam. The key verb to be used was end, though it would be nice to get the verb win in some proximity to it.One speechwriter came up with the formulation that ''new leadership will end the war and win the peace in the Pacific.'' Nixon made it part of his stump speech, and the juxtaposition of end and win -- though it did not claim to intend to win the war, but only the peace -- drove his major opponent for the G.O.P. nomination, Gov. George Romney of Michigan, up the wall.When a U.P.I. reporter pressed Nixon for specifics, the candidate demurred; the reporter wrote that it seemed Nixon was determined to keep his plan secret, though he did not quote Nixon as having said either secret or plan. But this gave Romney a chance to slam back at his opponent's promise. In what became the centerpiece of his stump speech in the snows of New Hampshire, Romney demanded to know, ''Where is your secret plan?'' That question skillfully presupposed an assertion of not just a general promise but also a detailed plan, and soon it became widely accepted that Nixon had said, ''I have a secret plan to end the war.''Years later, when a New York Times columnist attributed that direct quote to Nixon, a White House speechwriter challenged him to find the quote in anything taken down by pencil or recorder at the time. The pundit searched high and low and had to admit the supposed remark was unsourceable. (Look, the Nixon speechwriter was me and the columnist was my current colleague, Tony Lewis; I didn't have to research this.)During Ronald Reagan's run for re-election in 1984, Democrats took a leaf from the Romney playbook and charged him with having a secret plan to raise taxes after the election. This forced Reagan to say defensively he would raise taxes only ''as a last resort'' and reminded politicians that the old secret-plan charge had legs.Even Gore, a few weeks before he leveled the tried-and-true phrase at Bush, showed he was aware of its old-chestnuttiness. In a hilarious, deadpan, self-mocking speech to the Gridiron Club in Washington, he was widely reported to have said he had a secret plan to win the White House: he would claim credit for all the good stuff that had happened in the past eight years and dissociate himself from the bad stuff.Meanwhile, George W. Bush has been using an attack word of his own to characterize the Gore approach to Social Security: ''For eight years,'' he wrote in a fund-raising letter, ''Clinton/Gore has had history's greatest opportunity to reform Social Security. They chose to demagogue the problem, not repair it.''I kept this letter, sent to me by its recipient, Leila Hadley Luce of New York, to note the use of the beslashed singular subject Clinton/Gore, followed properly by the singular verb has, but then followed incorrectly by they. Clinton/Gore is a team and takes an it.But Mrs. Luce's covering note questioned the use of the ''new verb,'' to demagogue. Originally a noun, this was formed from the Greek demos, ''people,'' and agogos, ''leading''; it meant ''leader of the mob'' and now has the derogatory meaning of ''a politician who appeals to people's emotions.'' The noun can be used attributively to do the work of an adjective: Robert Southey in 1812 denounced ''the venom and the virulence of the demagogue journalists.''Governor Bush cannot be faulted for using demagogue as a verb. It was coined in that form by James Harrington in his 1656 utopian theory, ''Commonwealth of Oceana.'' He picked up the noun coined five years earlier by Thomas Hobbes and wrote of a time ''when that same ranting fellow Alcibiades fell a demagoging for the Sicilian war.'' In 1890, The Cincinnati Commercial Gazette wrote of President Benjamin Harrison, ''The president never thought of demagoging the matter.''Note the lack of a u in those usages of what most of us would until recently spell as demagoguing. But we live in a non-U world; just as catalogue and dialogue have been dropping their ue endings, so too will demagogue soon enough be spelled demagog, with its gerund demagoging.It's a hard word for the mob to handle; demagogic is pronounced with the final g soft, rhyming with logic, but demagoguery has the final g hard, rhyming with toggery. (Get away from that e-mail key; there is such a word. It means ''clothing.'')Will Gore now assail Bush for harboring a secret plan to attack him for demagoguery? Will Bush lash back in a debate by demanding he spell it? Both sides are now armed.
WHAT hath George Clooney wrought? Six weeks after Mr. Clooney used his star clout to get the drama ''Fail Safe'' broadcast live -- in black and white on national television -- entertainment-industry trade publications have already reported plans for two other live dramas. One is on CBS with Julie Andrews as the star; the other is on HBO with Glenn Close as co-executive producer. Other projects are in the talking stages.Optimists see this as the glimmer of a possible second golden age of television. More likely it's just the latest in reality programming. Bored with seeing attractive young people on MTV's ''Real World'' work out their emotional problems on camera? Not thrilled enough about the prospect of strangers voting one another off a desert island near Borneo while the whole world watches in CBS's forthcoming ''Survivor''? Instead you can watch actual famous people put themselves in potentially embarrassing situations and hope for the worst.WHAT hath George Clooney wrought? Six weeks after Mr. Clooney used his star clout to get the drama ''Fail Safe'' broadcast live -- in black and white on national television -- entertainment-industry trade publications have already reported plans for two other live dramas. One is on CBS with Julie Andrews as the star; the other is on HBO with Glenn Close as co-executive producer. Other projects are in the talking stages.Optimists see this as the glimmer of a possible second golden age of television. More likely it's just the latest in reality programming. Bored with seeing attractive young people on MTV's ''Real World'' work out their emotional problems on camera? Not thrilled enough about the prospect of strangers voting one another off a desert island near Borneo while the whole world watches in CBS's forthcoming ''Survivor''? Instead you can watch actual famous people put themselves in potentially embarrassing situations and hope for the worst.''Maybe somebody will make a mistake; that's half of the appeal,'' says Jeff Kisseloff, the author of ''The Box: An Oral History of Television 1920-61.''  ''It's just a gimmick. It's not the golden age of television.''The potential for disaster seems to interest the press. Articles about ''Fail Safe'' referred to the show's being broadcast three hours later on the West Coast, ''mistakes and all,'' and asked producers to comment on what would happen if an actor forgot a line or tripped over a wire. The answer: we'll just keep going. Much like the actors appearing on stages across the country on any given night. Theater actors are full of stories about losing their place or their pants or their props and riffing their way through. Now there's excitement.The same sort of fascination also works its way into possibly apocryphal stories about those live television plays in the 1950's: the night the corpse didn't realize the camera was still on him and got up and walked away, for instance. But the energy of those shows didn't come only from immediacy.''In the old days they were flying by the seat of their pants,'' says Mr. Kisseloff. To compare broadcasting a live television play in 2000 to doing one 45 or 50 years ago is, he says, ''like getting into an airplane and thinking you're taking the same risks as Orville and Wilbur Wright.'' The people working in television in the 1950's were, he says, ''young and talented and excited -- everything that this is not.''Ron Simon, curator of television at the Museum of Television and Radio in New York, couldn't agree more. ''There were new voices and original scripts, creating a voice and a mood for television, creating a whole language,'' he says. ''There was a whole community of technical people'' thrilled to be specializing in a brave new field.And, as Mr. Simon points out, there was Fred Coe, the producer -- legendary within the television industry -- who nurtured writing talents like Paddy Chayefsky, Horton Foote and Gore Vidal. The teleplays they created were largely, he says, about ''contemporary life in the 50's.''  ''Marty,'' for instance, the 1953 television play written by Chayefsky, was not just about an unmarried young butcher with a possessive mother and no ideas for what to do on Saturday night, but about the transition from ''tradition to modern values,'' from prewar to postwar thinking. ''Fail Safe'' -- which starred Richard Dreyfuss, Brian Dennehy, Harvey Keitel and Noah Wyle -- was based on a 1964 movie and dealt with the cold war anxieties of the early 60's.The next big live network drama is also an adaptation of an older work, although its concerns are less specifically tied to a particular era. CBS is set to do a live broadcast in late fall of ''On Golden Pond,'' which most people know as the 1981 film starring Katharine Hepburn, Henry Fonda and Jane Fonda. Julie Andrews will star as the devoted wife of a physically frail retired college professor, helping him through the terrors of aging. The roles of her husband and their angry, alienated daughter, Chelsea, are still to be cast.Craig Anderson, who directed the original stage play by Ernest Thompson (first at the Hudson Guild Theater, then on Broadway in the late 70's), is directing the television version. And he is doing it, he says, just because it's a challenge.''This is an opportunity to mix my two lives,'' says Mr. Anderson, referring to his live theater work and his career as a television producer. ''There aren't any rules.''At least that's a golden-age attitude. Mr. Anderson is considering using a turntable set, which would move as the actors walked (''It has a little bit of moviemaking in it''), and hopes to ''invent some new cameras'' designed for the dual demands of television and theater. ''On Golden Pond'' will be staged in Los Angeles, and the broadcast will include views of the black-tie audience, which, it is hoped, will laugh and cry at the appropriate times.Still, it isn't much of a risk to present a story that has had thousands of stage productions since the film was nominated for 10 Academy Awards and won three, including Mr. Fonda's first and only.If there are going to be original plays in television's future, they may come from Father Lucky Productions, the company set up with HBO by Ms. Close and by Robert Pastorelli, who starred on the CBS sitcom ''Murphy Brown'' as the artist, house painter and nanny Eldin. Variety, the trade newspaper, reported that Father Lucky would develop and produce a series of dramas to be performed live and would begin by commissioning four dramas. No one at HBO was willing to discuss the project because, a publicity representative said, it was too early in the process.Maybe it shouldn't be surprising that a company like Father Lucky would be formed by two actors. Live performance may be a much bigger charge for those on the screen or the stage than for the people watching them. ''That relation between performer and audience is what acting is all about, what theater is all about,'' says Mr. Anderson, echoing a theater truism. If the relative profitability of feature films, television and live theater are any indication, though, the audience has not always shared that passion.Or maybe it's just that we see plenty of live television already.It's true that prime time programming consists mostly of filmed comedies and dramas and the daytime soap operas long ago switched to videotape. Even the late-night talk shows are taped hours (sometimes days) before they are broadcast. But the morning infotainment shows like ''Good Morning, America'' and the ''Today'' show are live, and Americans seem as thrilled now as their forebears were in the early 50's to stand outside the shows' studio windows and wave. Most sports events and awards shows are live. (The Oscars broadcast is particularly enjoyable in this respect because it's still afternoon in Los Angeles when the movie stars arrive, wearing that daring fashion combination of evening wear and sunglasses.)The police car chase, broadcast live from helicopters, has become a television staple. This may not say much for us as a culture, but it certainly feeds the need of some Americans to hold their breath and wait to see if a real-live human being is going to be caught, shot or blown up or meet some other terrible fate. Once you've seen O. J. Simpson in the vehicle being pursued, reportedly holding a gun to his head at one point, the tension about whether Noah Wyle will forget his lines just isn't that high.NBC's late-night comedy sketch show ''Saturday Night Live'' has, for 25 years, lived up to its name. In fact, it may be the one true success story among the industry's efforts to capitalize on the novelty of the live broadcast. The show has had its ups and downs, but it has never lost its slightly desperate edge. As its producer, Lorne Michaels, told Bill Carter of The New York Times last year, describing the process of writing, rewriting and rehearsing each sketch: ''It doesn't go on because it's ready. It goes on because it's 11:30.''FOX tried a live series nine years ago with ''Roc,'' a half-hour comedy about a garbage collector and his family in Baltimore. The theory was that since the cast included stage-seasoned actors like Charles S. Dutton, Rocky Carroll and Carl Gordon, the show should take advantage of it. But the novelty soon wore off (or never attracted enough regular viewers to begin with) and ''Roc'' went off the air after three seasons.For now, the novelty of live television drama may pay off in high ratings. ''Fail Safe'' did much better than CBS's Sunday night movie usually does, with a 10.3 rating, which means about 10.3 million households viewing. And that was up against both ''The X-Files'' and the season finale of ''The Sopranos.'' But the likelihood that a group of talented, intelligent, hungry young writers will find their way to the medium at the same time as a sympathetic, intelligent producer, creating that second golden age, is extremely slim. And even if it did happen, says Mr. Kisseloff, the new work would never find its way onto the air live.''There is just no chance-taking today,'' says Mr. Kisseloff. ''There's too much money involved.''TELEVISION/RADIO  Correction:  June 4, 2000, Sunday  An article on May 21 about live television dramas misidentified the director of a planned broadcast of ''On Golden Pond.'' He is Ernest Thompson, not Craig Anderson.Correction: June 4, 2000, SundayAn article on May 21 about live television dramas misidentified the director of a planned broadcast of ''On Golden Pond.'' He is Ernest Thompson, not Craig Anderson.<br><br>
Private GardensFollowing the lead of England, where private gardens have been opened to the public on special days for decades, the Garden Conservancy of America initiated a similar Open Days program and in 1995 published its first directory of hundreds of exceptional gardens all over the country.In the Northeast, the season begins in May. Two gardens may be seen today merely by showing up at the door and presenting the homeowner with $4, which goes toward the national preservation work of the Garden Conservancy and nonprofit local organizations.Private GardensFollowing the lead of England, where private gardens have been opened to the public on special days for decades, the Garden Conservancy of America initiated a similar Open Days program and in 1995 published its first directory of hundreds of exceptional gardens all over the country.In the Northeast, the season begins in May. Two gardens may be seen today merely by showing up at the door and presenting the homeowner with $4, which goes toward the national preservation work of the Garden Conservancy and nonprofit local organizations.From 10 a.m. to 6 p.m. today, visitors may stroll through the woodland  paths at 69 Bayberry Road in Middlebury, admire the cactus garden, planted walls and troughs, a rock garden and a 32-foot landscaped greenhouse of and succulents.On the site of an old mill in South Glastonbury a garden of perennials, shrubs and mixed borders filled with naturalistic plantings runs along a brook for 300 feet. The address is 124 High Street and visitors will be welcome from 10 a.m. to 4 p.m.A few simple rules of etiquette apply: no animals, no unsupervised children, no picture taking without the owner's consent, no littering or picking of flowers or plants. The privacy of the owner should also be honored by not attempting to contact him or her directly.For more information or to order this year's Open Days Directory of thousands of America's private residential and institutional gardens, call the Garden Conservancy in Cold Spring, N.Y. (914) 265-5384.Portraits From SouthburyThe York Square Cinema in New Haven is noted for its art gallery as well as its 55-year-old tradition of showing unusual domestic and foreign films that are not widely distributed. In its gallery through June 6 are a selection of portrait photographs made by Richmond Jones at the Southbury Training School in 1974 and 1975.During his long career as a photographer, Mr. Jones has produced work that appeared in exhibitions in Switzerland and Canada as well as in New York.His Southbury portraits are unusual in their focus on the individual. There are no shots of bleak interiors or institutional life, no polemics, no attempt to record a visual expose. Each portrait is skillfully composed, lighted and revealing of its subject. The theater's lobby gallery, at 61 Broadway, is accessible from 5 to 10 p.m., Monday through Friday, and from 1 to 10 p.m. Saturday and Sunday. The number to call for more information is (203) 776-6630.Old Lyme CentennialOne hundred years ago the boarding house that Florence Griswold ran in Old Lyme became the home of the Lyme Art Colony, populated in summer by American Impressionists, including Childe Hassam, Willard Metcalf, William Chadwick, Walter Griffin and Wilson Henry Irvine.In celebration of the colony's centennial, Patricia Norcia, a New York actress, researched and wrote a one-woman play about six women who lived at the house during the summer of 1910. Ms. Norcia will portray all of them in two performances, at 3 and 8 p.m. on Saturday at the Ivoryton Playhouse on Main Street in Ivoryton. Each performance will be followed by conversation between the actress and her audience.In the course of the production she portrays Whistling Mary, the Irish housemaid; Matilda Browne, the artist; Beatrice Hoffman, an artist's wife; Ellen Wilson, the first wife of President Woodrow Wilson; a farmer's wife, and Florence Griswold herself.Tickets are $15, students and adults over 64 $12. Reservations, directions and more information may be obtained by calling (860) 434-5542.Beyond StereotypesRobert Benson, Christine Breslin, John Garaventa, Thomas Giroir, Jack McConnell, Lanny Nagler, Rich Pomerantz, Edwina Stevenson and Michael Sundra (all members of the Connecticut chapter of the American Society of Media Photographers) are the contributors to an exhibition that celebrates the diversity and cultural heritage of Hartford and New Haven.Installed in the Promenade Gallery of the Bushnell in Hartford through June 4, the exhibition represents an effort by the artists to get past the cities' stereotypes and reveal often overlooked architectural and human attributes. The number to call for more information is (860) 987-6000.Thinking Ahead''Estate Planning Strategies: Avoiding Near-Death Tax Experiences and Bad Heir Days'' is the title of a program to be presented on Wednesday at 7:30 in the Cole Auditorium of the Greenwich Library.Two specialists, Conrad Teitell and Daniel L. Daniels, partners in the law firm of Cummings & Lockwood, will offer advice on how to slash death taxes and how to insure that everyone is provided for: loved ones, charities and oneself. They will attempt to broaden the audience's understanding of estate planning as more than passing property along, and provide guidelines for the kind of planning that almost guarantees a good night's sleep.Mr. Daniels, a graduate of Harvard Law School, writes and lectures on estate planning, and is listed in Who's Who in American Law. Mr. Teitell has law degrees from Columbia University and New York University, and is listed in The Best Lawyers in America.The program is appropriate for all ages and all net worth levels, and will include a question and answer period. The library is at 101 West Putnam Avenue (Post Road) and admission is free. Call (203) 622-7900 for more information.Small Town AmericaWilliam S. Phillips's limited-edition prints on view at the Greenwich Workshop Gallery in Fairfield through next Sunday can be misleading. Viewers who grew up in small towns can look at his pictures and almost swear that they are looking at that town next to theirs or the town where an old friend lived.The model for ''Rejoice,'' one of the prints in the exhibition, could be the Fourth of July celebration in some pretty village, but it's a figment of the artist's imagination and a masterpiece of nostalgia.Of the 26 pictures in the show, 10 are aviation prints, the genre for which Mr. Phillips has been well known for decades. One print is of the Enola Gay, signed by the members of its crew.Hometown Americana is a new direction for Mr. Phillips. ''Rejoice'' is printed on coated canvas and then highlighted with oils by the artist. It is priced at $695. The original painting sold for $35,000, said Jim Conroy, a spokesman for the gallery. The remaining prints are priced from $175 to $365.The gallery, at 1657 Post Road, is open from noon to 5 p.m. on Sunday, from 10 a.m.to 4 p.m. Monday, from 10 to 5 Tuesday through Saturday, and until 7:30 Thursday evening. Call (203) 255-4613 for recorded information.ELEANOR CHARLES
LINDA GRANT, a school board member, calls the dispute over a proposal to put up lights at the high school football field here ''a tinder box that could go up at any time.''On one side are residents offering to donate $125,000 to pay for the lights and also to provide additional funds to cover necessary operating costs. They want the lights so that teams can play at night, and they argue that it will let parents share more after-work time with their children.LINDA GRANT, a school board member, calls the dispute over a proposal to put up lights at the high school football field here ''a tinder box that could go up at any time.''On one side are residents offering to donate $125,000 to pay for the lights and also to provide additional funds to cover necessary operating costs. They want the lights so that teams can play at night, and they argue that it will let parents share more after-work time with their children.''The lights will bring us together,''said Sandra Zwerger, a member of the group that favors the lights.On the other side are members of the Rye Natural Light Association, who don't want lighting poles as tall as 15 feet rearing up from a quaint part of the city, across the street from the church where George and Barbara Bush married. They fear the lights will mar the view and lower property values.The controversy has proved extremely divisive, said Ms. Grant, chairman of a Board of Education advisory committee that was appointed over the winter to study the issue.At meetings, the opposing sides sit on separate sides of the aisle, like feuding factions at a family wedding. ''It's upstaging everything,'' Ms. Grant said, ''even the budget.''The pro-light group argues that the night illumination would not add to the taxpayers' burden.Also, the lights would be turned on only seven times a year and would be lowered on their poles when not in use, said John Eyler, the president of Toys 'R' Us and a member of the pro-lights group. ''After we rented lights for $5,000 for one night game,'' he said, ''we thought about how it would be a great idea to raise money to install permanent lights so we could hold more events.''But the opponents have other concerns.''The proposed industrial-style lights are completely out of character with the high school architecture and historic and pristine nature of this neighborhood,'' the group that is opposing the lights said in a statement.Or as Drew Shea, a banker and the president of the Rye Natural Light Association, said, ''Large lights will attract crowds and create a celebratory atmosphere in people's backyards.''The opponents see the gift as benefiting only the high school's athletes, while the school district has more important issues to consider.''This gift looks a little frivolous to many people,'' Ms. Grant said.  ''What kind of a statement is it making when maybe it would be more important to create another first grade to maintain our pupil-teacher ratios.''Cathleen Morgan, the chairwoman of the Board of Education, called it ''a very very controversial issue and one that people are very passionate about.''The board will vote on May 31  whether to accept the gift.
To the Editor:Abraham Lincoln, Adlai Stevenson, John F. Kennedy, Ronald Reagan, Bob Dole. What did each have that today's presidential candidates lack in such great abundance? A sense of humor, springing from the gut, not a 3-by-5-inch ghost-written card [''Fear and Joking on the Late-Night Campaign Trail'' by Peter Marks, May 7]. Neither Al Gore nor George W. Bush has the instincts it takes to go joke for joke with a killer comic. Indeed, it sometimes seems that both Mr. Gore and Mr. Bush have decided that maybe Calvin Coolidge had the right idea: ''I think the American public wants a solemn ass as a President. And I think I'll go along with them.'' Each would profit from the advice of Richard M. Nixon, who, of all people, said, ''The worst sin in politics is being boring.'' And, when elected, the winner should keep in mind this warning from Mr. Dole: ''What people often forget is that the last laugh doesn't belong to the victorious candidate -- it belongs to the late-night comics.''WES PEDERSEN  Chevy Chase, Md.To the Editor:Abraham Lincoln, Adlai Stevenson, John F. Kennedy, Ronald Reagan, Bob Dole. What did each have that today's presidential candidates lack in such great abundance? A sense of humor, springing from the gut, not a 3-by-5-inch ghost-written card [''Fear and Joking on the Late-Night Campaign Trail'' by Peter Marks, May 7]. Neither Al Gore nor George W. Bush has the instincts it takes to go joke for joke with a killer comic. Indeed, it sometimes seems that both Mr. Gore and Mr. Bush have decided that maybe Calvin Coolidge had the right idea: ''I think the American public wants a solemn ass as a President. And I think I'll go along with them.'' Each would profit from the advice of Richard M. Nixon, who, of all people, said, ''The worst sin in politics is being boring.'' And, when elected, the winner should keep in mind this warning from Mr. Dole: ''What people often forget is that the last laugh doesn't belong to the victorious candidate -- it belongs to the late-night comics.''WES PEDERSEN  Chevy Chase, Md.POLITICIANS AND TV
WHEN brownstones were constructed on block after block of Brooklyn in the late 19th century, they provided housing for well-to-do people whose live-in servants, usually immigrants from Italy, Ireland or Germany, would dust the intricately carved moldings and cook in the ground-floor kitchens, sending food upstairs to the dining room by dumbwaiter.Eventually though, brownstones  in much of Brooklyn became associated with the working class, and then the poor, who moved in when the buildings were divided into rooming houses. People with money, by and large, didn't want brownstones in Brooklyn; they wanted to live in apartment buildings in Manhattan or houses in the suburbs.WHEN brownstones were constructed on block after block of Brooklyn in the late 19th century, they provided housing for well-to-do people whose live-in servants, usually immigrants from Italy, Ireland or Germany, would dust the intricately carved moldings and cook in the ground-floor kitchens, sending food upstairs to the dining room by dumbwaiter.Eventually though, brownstones  in much of Brooklyn became associated with the working class, and then the poor, who moved in when the buildings were divided into rooming houses. People with money, by and large, didn't want brownstones in Brooklyn; they wanted to live in apartment buildings in Manhattan or houses in the suburbs.All that of course has changed. Brownstones are chic. They're appreciated. And of course they're appreciating. Houses that were affordable to the middle class not long ago are now homes for the rich, some selling for $1.1 million and more in well-established brownstone neighborhoods like Park Slope, and  $750,000 in Fort Greene and Clinton Hill.There is however, a section of Brooklyn that is close to Manhattan and still has hundreds of town houses and brownstones occupied by regular working and professional people: Bedford-Stuyvesant. To the people who live there, mostly African-Americans or those with Caribbean roots, it is a tight-knit, family-oriented community that has been saddled with a negative image that does not reflect the reality there.To real estate brokers it is a gold mine, just waiting to be discovered by newcomers who have no idea of its charms, of its thousands of historic homes just 15 minutes on the A train from downtown Manhattan.Everett H. Ortner, chairman of the citywide Brownstone Revival Coalition, says Bed-Stuy may have as many as 6,000 brownstones, perhaps more than any other neighborhood. ''The quality is superb,'' he said. When houses go on the market,  brokers say they are often priced at less than $300,000.Walking the streets of Bed-Stuy, it feels like many other brownstone neighborhoods did 10 or 15 years ago, before they became home to chic little shops and restaurants. Lovely homes fill block after block, but the commercial activity consists mainly of beauty parlors, nail salons and other prosaic services and products.Some of the main commercial streets are dotted with vacant storefronts. On a hot day, it is hard to find a shop selling sandwiches or ice cream cones. ''You can go block after block and not see a grocery store,'' said Kenneth Adams, president of the Brooklyn Chamber of Commerce. ''There's a lag on the commercial side.''That disparity between the quality of the housing and the variety of stores is something that is starting to change, and if it does in any significant way, the neighborhood will become more appealing to people who  associate city life with a convenient cup of coffee.Recently, local people have started the kinds of enterprises they want to patronize. Jean Williams-Cutler, a native of Jamaica, and her husband, Timothy Cutler, an Englishman, opened a small, casual restaurant  at the corner of Marcy and Putnam Avenues last fall called Doctor's Cave Cafe, after the beach in Jamaica where they met 11 years ago. Ms. Williams-Cutler said they decided to open a cafe in the building they have owned and lived in for 10 years because the space had been occupied by a ''greasy spoon'' and they believed the neighborhood needed better restaurants. Ms. Williams-Cutler, a nurse, and her husband, a lawyer, serve things like homemade pizza, quiche, roasted oxtail, pastas and curry.Not far away, on Lewis Avenue, Monique Greenwood and her husband, Glenn Pogue,  have bought a building with five commercial spaces, all to be rented by local entrepreneurs, and six apartments above. A  bookstore called Brownstone Books is scheduled to open, as is an antiques store called the Parlor Floor. And in July, when the new stores open, Ms. Greenwood and Mr. Pogue will start a cafe, named Mirrors by their 8-year-old daughter, Glynn, ''so people can come in and see their beauty,'' Ms. Greenwood said.They already own a restaurant on the same block, Akwaaba, opened two years ago, and a few blocks away on McDonough Street, the Akwaaba Mansion, where they cater to a bed-and-breakfast clientele in four elegantly furnished rooms in their 18-room house. ''Akwaaba'' means ''welcome'' in Ghana.MS. GREENWOOD, who is also the editor in chief of Essence magazine, said she and her husband became entranced with the neighborhood when they went on a tour of historic homes 11 years ago that was sponsored by the local Brownstoners. ''First we fell in love with the houses,'' Ms. Greenwood said, ''and then with the people who lived in the houses.'' The community, she said, ''has everything I would ever want, except some amenities.''Her passion for the neighborhood is typical among many of those who own the brownstones, many of them with their original details intact and some of them part of the official Stuyvesant Heights Historic District. It is not unusual to meet people in Bed-Stuy with extended family in their homes or on the same block. Houses tend to stay in the same family for decades.It is that stability that seems threatened by the sudden interest by brokers in selling the homes to people who are not from the neighborhood. Residents complain of aggressive door-to-door solicitations by brokers seeking listings, and offering to pay cash. Brokers who have for years done business in Bed-Stuy say they have to find more listings in the neighborhood to satisfy potential buyers who can't find anything they can afford in neighboring Clinton Hill or Fort Greene.Eva M. Daniels, who has her own real estate company in Fort Greene, says escalating prices have put houses in Clinton Hill and Fort Greene beyond the reach of many aspiring buyers. ''Bed-Stuy,'' she said, ''is a very hot community right now. I cannot tell you how many calls I get every day asking for Bed-Stuy.''But prices are rising quickly. She said she received a call from a mortgage broker recently looking for comparables for a house that was selling for $365,000. Last year, Ms. Daniels said, she sold eight houses in Bed-Stuy, and the one that went for $265,000 was considered high at the time.  Now, the same house might be $310,000.Right now, she said, ''I have three listings in Bed-Stuy, and it's not enough. I'm setting out to increase my listings. You write letters. You make calls. I know a lot of people. I get a lot of referrals.'' Her two grown sons live in the neighborhood, and she said it's a place that has ''only gotten better, and it was never as bad as people thought it was.''A few years ago, she said, people from outside the neighborhood were typically uninterested in renting there. Now, she said, she is renting floor-through apartments for $900 a month or so, and duplexes for as much as $1,800.Brokers say that people interested in Bed-Stuy rarely ask about schools, but that if clients do ask, the brokers refer them to books that evaluate local public schools.The area is also receiving a new focus from the Corcoran Group, a large and aggressive Manhattan-based broker that has been expanding its Brooklyn operations and  expects to open a new office in Fort Greene in late September. Jerry Minsky, who will be the managing director of downtown sales for that office, said Bed-Stuy has as many as 20 blocks in its historic district alone of ''fabulously intact town houses.''For the entire neighborhood, he estimates that the average selling price of a town house last year was $180,963, up from $156,006 the year before. He believes he has customers who can pay between $350,000 and $399,000 who would buy in Bed-Stuy because they can't afford Clinton Hill or Fort Greene, and they want ''museum condition'' brownstones.That is exactly the kind of price hike that will make it difficult for young people who have grown up in Bed-Stuy to remain. ''Bed-Stuy is a community of extended family,'' said Tohma Faulkner, a member of the Brownstoners of Bedford-Stuyvesant, the local group dedicated to preserving the old housing. She owns a house with her sister, which they share with their mother. ''Young people are having problems coming back,'' she said. ''My goddaughter is going to law school. When she comes back in three or four years to buy a house, she's priced out.''Bed-Stuy may not be known to outsiders for its tight community of brownstone owners, but that community has existed for years. ''There have always been middle-income and upper-income African-Americans there -- sophisticated, well-educated people,'' said Jerome Krase, chairman of the sociology department at Brooklyn College and the Murray Koppelman professor. But, he said, because of racism, and because Bed-Stuy was populated by blacks, ''people figured it was a slum.''The area has had a high percentage of poor people for decades, as well as problems with abandoned housing. But the city, as well as nonprofit groups like the Bedford-Stuyvesant Restoration Corporation and the Bridge Street Development Corporation,  have made progress toward solving some of those problems.The New York City Department of Housing Preservation and Development has, in partnership with nonprofit groups and developers, had 700 two-  and three-family houses built in Bed-Stuy in the last decade, and 2,800 housing units rehabilitated. The commissioner, Richard T. Roberts, said that the city had also encouraged retail development, particularly on Fulton Street, that has led to some services people in the neighborhood said they needed, like a sit-down restaurant, Choices by Oasis.The city has contracted with developers that have successfully renovated and resold most of the 79 brownstones that the city owned in the neighborhood.Charles Brass, president of the New York City Housing Partnership, said the buyers of the 900 new homes his group has completed are stable, employed people earning incomes up to $70,000. ''There haven't been any defaults to speak of,'' he said. ''In all of our projects, there's still strong demand.''THOSE houses let people know that the neighborhood is not being ignored. ''The infrastructure has gotten much better,'' said Bryant Johnson McInnis, who has published a book with photos and text about Bed-Stuy, called ''Glory in a Snapshot.''The rehab of vacant buildings has made a major change,'' said Mr. McInnis, a homeowner in the neighborhood who is the assistant director of Neighborhood Housing Services' Bed-Stuy office.The biggest change now needs to come in the commercial area, according to Charles Atwell, a longtime broker and property manager who owns Stuyvesant Heights Realty. Mr. Atwell is disappointed that more local people are not starting businesses. A space that's 900 square feet, he said, rents for only $1,200 a month. With the influx of brokers from elsewhere and the rising residential prices, he fears that when businesses do arrive to cater to the newcomers, they will be run by outsiders, or national chains.It is difficult to generalize about crime in Bedford-Stuyvesant, because the area is covered by several police precincts. But  crime figures for the first four and a half months of this year, a police spokesman said, show that incidences in all the major categories, like murder, robbery and burglary, are down from last year at the same time, for the area bounded by Fulton Street on the south, Halsey Street on the north, Tompkins Avenue on the west and Stuyvesant Avenue on the east, which includes the historic district. Only the incidence of rape has increased.The changes in Bed-Stuy are taking place in an area with strong block associations and so many churches that some blocks have more than one. In fact, it was the presence of the churches that led Laurie Cumbo to open Bed-Stuy's first museum this year.Ms. Cumbo, a graduate of Spelman College in Atlanta with a master's in arts administration from New York University, did her thesis on Bed-Stuy's ability to support a museum. Studies showed, she said, that people of African-American descent who attended museums regularly were also dedicated churchgoers. That was one thing that led her to believe that the community -- with by her count 82 churches -- was ripe for a museum.Ms. Cumbo, 25, circulated her thesis to local politicians and church groups and found interest from Bridge Street Church, a black congregation now located on Stuyvesant Avenue that was formed in 1766. This year, in 1,000 square feet of the church's newly renovated space, she opened Mocada, an acronym for Museum of Contemporary  African Diasporian Arts. Her current show, of work by Melvin Clark, attracted 300 people to its opening reception.The museum is just one outlet for artists. Some Bed-Stuy artists are showing their work through a relatively new group called  Sonya, which stands for South of the Navy Yard Artists. Gigi Stankiewicz, an artist who creates works based on the human genome project, lives on Classon Avenue in Bed-Stuy. Although people associate lofts with artists, she says brownstones provide good working space because of the high ceilings on the parlor floors.Ms. Stankiewicz moved to New York after receiving her master's degree from the Rhode Island School of Design, and says she is particularly charmed by Bed-Stuy because she lived in Newport for six years and  likes the historic houses and quiet streets in both places. ''There is a renaissance going on here,'' she said. ''Homes are getting fixed up. We're at the beginning.''Some of the significant art activity in Bed-Stuy isn't immediately obvious, but it is there, and growing. Benjamin and Elaine Antonetty recently opened an art gallery on the parlor floor of their Jefferson Avenue brownstone, which they bought two years ago. It had been a rooming house occupied by 13 tenants, many of them not even paying  rent, said Mr. Antonetty. Over a year, first by persuasion and then by legal action, he removed the tenants, and when they were gone began restoring the house.Now, their new home is a showplace. Mr. Antonetty worked as the general contractor, having all of the wainscoting stripped and the carved wooden moldings returned to their original state. ''Everything was painted,'' he said, even the subtly colored tiles in front of the fireplaces.Everything is returned to its original glory, with mahogany on the parlor floor, cherry on the second, and beech on the top. Mr. Antonetty has a passion, he says, for wood, which may be the source of his strong feeling for these 19th-century houses. ''To me, wood is strength,'' he said.Mrs. Antonetty, who grew up in Fort Greene, and Mr. Antonetty, who grew up in a public housing project in Bushwick, moved to Bed-Stuy 15 years ago, and before buying their new house lived in one next door that they still own. ''We fell in love with brownstones,'' she said. Their new house reflects the melding of Victorian and African influences, with a new stained-glass image in their front door that is an African symbol for belief in god.They run their art business, which includes a framing shop, the gallery -- Aviva Arts, which is open by appointment only -- and a mobile gallery, where companies allow them to sell directly to the employees. They sell mostly lithographs, serigraphs and original paintings by people of African descent.NEARBY, Doreen de Leon, a native of Grenada, lives in a brownstone on Jefferson Avenue that she bought in 1984 for $60,000. She also has her own real estate company in Brooklyn, which she started shortly after retiring from her job as a bacteriologist. She also has occasional art shows on the parlor floor of her home.Ms. de Leon said she does a lot of sales and rentals in the area. Apartments that rent for about $1,000 a month, she said, would be $1,500 in Fort Greene, and they are drawing people with their fireplaces and parquet floors. ''The majority of calls are people coming from Manhattan,'' she said.For longtime homeowners, the new attractiveness of their neighborhood is both annoying and gratifying. Demetrice Mills,  who works in computer systems on Wall Street, lives with his wife and three children on Classon Avenue. He came to New York 27 years ago as a teenager on his own from North Carolina and moved into a rooming house. He fell in love with the owner's daughter; they married, and eventually bought the house from her parents. They still own that house, as well as another on Classon that they now occupy.The influx of real estate people looking for listings, he said, is grating on longtime residents. ''There's a door-to-door campaign by realtors,'' he said, started in the last year. People have even posted notices saying they will pay cash for houses.''A lot of the neighbors are quite upset with that,'' he said. ''It's like an invasion. There's the sense that white people are coming to buy our houses, that we are being pushed out of our neighborhood.''It's disturbing, he said, that family members who might want to keep a house won't be able to afford to buy it from relatives. The neighborhood has a family feeling, he said, that is most evident in barber shops, where young boys and old men and every age in between hang out, talking, even if they're not getting haircuts.He hopes, he said, that newcomers will become part of this open, friendly neighborhood, and that they will send their children to the local schools. He tries, too, to look at the economic benefits of the change that is just beginning.African-American homeowners, he said, will have property that is far more valuable than it has been, property they can leverage, through home equity loans, into cash to improve their lives, to send their children to college. And maybe, to help them buy the more-expensive homes in their old neighborhood.
A guide to cultural and recreational goings-on around the state this week. Items may be submitted by mail to On the Towns, Sunday New Jersey Section, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y. 10036; by fax to (212) 556-7219, or by e-mail to njtowns@nytimes.com.MUSICALBERT MUSIC HALL Bluegrass Root II. Today, 1 p.m. to 5 p.m. Free. 125 Wells Mills Road, Waretown. (609) 971-1593.BLOOMFIELD MIDDLE SCHOOL Farewell concert of Edward J. Napiowocki, music director and conductor of the Bloomfield Symphony Orchestra. Today at 3 p.m. Suggested donation: $3. 60 Huck Road. (908) 686-1224.CALVARY EPISCOPAL CHURCH Calvary Chorale performs three Bach cantatas (Nos. 4, 78, 79) with orchestra and soloists. Today at 4 p.m. Freewill offering. 31 Woodland Avenue, Summit. (908) 277-1547.CHRIST CHURCH Spring Choral Concert: Christian and Jewish Sacred Music. Today at 5 p.m. Tickets: $7; $5 for students and older people. 5 Paterson Street, New Brunswick. (732) 545-6262.THE CORNERSTONE Mike LeDonne Trio.  Wednesday, 7:30 p.m. to 11:30 p.m. Jill McCarren Quartet with Andy Fusco. Friday, 9 p.m. to 1 a.m. Warren Chiasson Quartet. Saturday, 9 p.m. to 1 a.m. 25 New Street, Metuchen. (732) 549-5306.JOHN HARMS CENTER FOR THE ARTS ''Fun with Jazz and the Classics,'' featuring Bucky Pizzarelli, jazz guitarist, joined by the Sutton Ensemble. Tuesday at 8 p.m. Tickets: $20; $18 for older people; $15 for students. 30 North Van Brunt Street, Englewood. (201) 567-3600.HOLY TRINITY R. C. CHURCH The Madrigal Singers will present ''Visions of Spring,'' paired with poetry selections read by Judy Sullivan. Today at 7 p.m. Corner of Westfield Avenue and First Street, Westfield. (908) 233-1570.J. C. C. THURNAUER SCHOOL OF MUSIC Annual Faculty Showcase Recital. Today at 4:30 p.m.  Donations accepted. Eric Brown Theater, 411 East Clinton Avenue, Tenafly. (201) 569-7900, extension 235.JOE'S MILL HILL SALOON The Bob Smith Trio, jazz and blues. Friday at 9 p.m. Dick Gratton with Carci Deising, vocals. Saturday at 8:30 p.m. Broad and Market Streets, Trenton. (609) 394-7222.MAXWELL'S Man or Astro-Man?; Enon. Tomorrow at 9 p.m. Tickets: $10. Kick Our the Jams DJ Series: Greg Tormo. Tuesday at 8 p.m. Free. Sleater-Kinney; the Gossip.  Wednesday at 9 p.m. Tickets: $9. Stereo Total; the Rondelles; Honeybunch. Thursday at 9 p.m. Tickets: $7. Luna. Friday and Saturday at 10 p.m. Tickets: $14. 1039 Washington Street, Hoboken. (201) 653-1703.McCARTER THEATER David Daniels, countertenor. Tomorrow at 8 p.m. Tickets: $28 and $25. 91 University Place, Princeton. (609) 258-2787.MINSTREL COFFEEHOUSE Greg Greenway and William Smith, folk singers. Friday at 8:30 p.m. Tickets: $5. Morris County Park Commission's Cultural Center, 300 Mendham Road, Morristown. (973) 335-9489.1860 HOUSE MONTGOMERY CULTURAL CENTER ''Golden Apples of the Sun,'' a musical anthology about the life of Charles Lindbergh. Today 3 p.m. and 7 p.m. 124 Montgomery Road, Skillman. (609) 631-9680.NEW JERSEY PERFORMING ARTS CENTER Mahler's ''Resurrection'' Symphony. Today at 3 p.m. Prudential Hall. Tickets: $15 to $58. 1 Center Street, Newark. (888) 466-5722.OCEAN GROVE SUMMER CONCERT SERIES Saturday through September 9. Monmouth Symphony Orchestra. Saturday at 7:30 p.m.  Tickets: $18; free for children. The Great Auditorium, two blocks from the ocean at the intersection of Pilgrim and Ocean Pathways, Ocean Grove. (732) 988-0645.PARAMOUNT THEATER Monmouth Symphony Orchestra, featuring clarinet and bassoon duet. Today at 2:30 p.m. Tickets: $18; $14 for older people; free for children. Reservations are suggested. Ocean Avenue, Asbury Park. (732) 918-6676.PNC BANK ARTS CENTER Styx, REO Speedwagon, Eddie Money. Next Sunday at 7 p.m.  Tickets: $17.50 to $45. Exit 116, off the Garden State Parkway, Holmdel. (201) 507-8900.PRINCETON UNIVERSITY RICHARDSON AUDITORIUM Greater Princeton Youth Orchestra, Fernando Raucci, music director. Today at 3 p.m. Tickets: $7. Alexander Hall, Princeton. (609) 258-5000.PRINCETON UNIVERSITY TAPLIN AUDITORIUM Mika Ikeda, pianist. Works of Bach, Copland and Schumann. Today at 3 p.m. Free. Friends of Music at Princeton student recital.  Tuesday at 8 p.m. Free. Taplin Auditorium, Fine Hall. Washington Road, Princeton. (609) 258-4239.RARITAN RIVER MUSIC FESTIVAL 2000 The Lark Quartet. Saturday at 7:30 p.m. Clinton Presbyterian Church, 91 Center Street (one block north of Main Street), Clinton. (908) 213-1100.RENAISSANCE CAFE ''Jazz Lovers Fridays,'' featuring Carrie Jackson and her all-star Jazzin Trio. Friday, 6 p.m. to 10 p.m. No cover. 195 Mulberry Street, at Lafayette Street, Newark. (973) 623-0002.ST. PAUL'S EPISCOPAL CHURCH Elements String Quartet. Tomorrow at 8 p.m. Plymouth State Chamber singers in concert. Thursday at 8 p.m. Donations requested. 414 East Broad Street, Westfield. (908) 232-8506.ST. PETER'S EPISCOPAL CHURCH ''One World, Many Voices,'' concert by the Arcadian Chorale. Today at 3:30 p.m. Tickets: $9; $8 for older people; $7 for students. 33 Throckmorton Street, Freehold. (732) 583-4007.ST. PETER'S EPISCOPAL CHURCH ''Welcome, Sweet Springtime: Birds, Trees, Flowers, Lovers'' concert featuring Ars Musica Antiqua, early music ensemble of instrumentalists and vocalists. Today at 3 p.m. Tickets:  $15; $12 for students and older people. 215 Boulevard, Mountain Lakes. (973) 334-4429.SCHOLA CANTORUM ON HUDSON ''An Afternoon With Bernstein.'' Today at 4 p.m. Tickets: $10; $6 for students and older people. St. Michael Church, 252 Ninth Street, Jersey City. (201) 798-6137.SPRINGFIELD PUBLIC LIBRARY Chinese American Music Ensemble. Today at 2 p.m.  Free by ticket only. Donald B. Palmer Museum, 66 Mountain Avenue, Springfield. (973) 376-4930.STANHOPE HOUSE Mardi Gras on Wheels, featuring Cairo and the VooDudes. Today, 4 p.m. to 9 p.m. Tickets: $10. The David Nelson Band.  Thursday at 9 p.m. Tickets: $12. Billy Hector, blues-rock. Friday at 10 p.m. Tickets: $6. A.L. James and Spare Change. Saturday at 10 p.m.  Tickets: $6. Blue Sparks, dance music. Next Sunday at 9 p.m. Tickets: $10. 45 Main Street, Stanhope. (973) 347-0458.STATE THEATER Ringo Starr and his All Star Band. Wednesday at 8 p.m. Tickets: $35 to $75. 15 Livingston Avenue, New Brunswick. (732) 246-7469.TEMPLE BETH EL OF NORTHERN VALLEY ''Generally Gershwin.'' Tomorrow at 7 p.m.  Tickets: $10, $12. 221 Schraalenburgh Road, Closter. (201) 768-5112.UNITARIAN CHURCH The Claring Chamber Players will present their final concert of the 1999-2000 season. Today at 3 p.m. Tickets:  $18; $15 for older people; $8 for students. 67 Church Street, Montclair. (973) 744-7654.WEST SIDE PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH RIDGEWOOD 11th Annual Community Hymn Festival. Today at 7:30 p.m. Freewill donation: $7. South Monroe Street and West Ridgewood Avenue. (201) 652-1966.WESTMINSTER CHOIR COLLEGE OF RIDER UNIVERSITY Ena Bronstein, pianist. Faculty Recitals. Today at 4 p.m. Tickets: $5. Randall Thompson at 100 Years and More, with the Youth Chorale Chamber Singers. Thursday at 8 p.m. Tickets: $5. Bristol Chapel, 101 Walnut Lane, Princeton. (609) 219-2001.TheaterALGONQUIN ARTS THEATER ''Light Up the Sky,'' Moss Hart's comedy. Today at 3 p.m. Tickets: $11 to $34. 171 Main Street, Manasquan. (732) 345-1400.AMERICAN STAGE COMPANY ''Ain't Misbehavin','' musical. Today at 2:30 p.m. and 7 p.m. Tickets: $20 to $30. Becton Hall, Fairleigh Dickinson University, 1000 River Road, Teaneck. (201) 692-7744.CENTENARY STAGE COMPANY Spring Festival of Shows, featuring ''Tom Sawyer.'' Today at 4:30 p.m.; Saturday at 2 p.m.; next Sunday at 7:30 p.m. ''Anything Goes.'' Today at 1 p.m.; Saturday at 8 p.m.; next Sunday at 1 p.m. ''West Side Story.'' Friday at 8 p.m.; Saturday at 5 p.m.; next Sunday at 7:30 p.m. Tickets: $8; $6 for children under 12. Centenary College, 400 Jefferson Street, Hackensack. (908) 979-0900.CHESTER THEATER GROUP ''Waiting for Godot.'' Through Saturday. Friday and Saturday at 8 p.m. Tickets: $15; $14 for students and older people. Black River Playhouse, Grove Street, Chester. (908) 879-7304.CIRCLE PLAYERS ''A View From the Bridge,'' by Arthur Miller. Through June 3. Fridays and Saturdays at 8:30 p.m.; matinee performance today at 2 p.m. Tickets: $12; today's matinee: $10. 416 Victoria Avenue, Piscataway. (732) 968-7555.ELIZABETH PLAYHOUSE ''Of Human Bondage,'' by Karon Semones. Through June 4. Fridays and Saturdays at 7:30 p.m.; Sundays at 2 p.m. Tickets: $8; $6 for students and older people; $5 on Fridays. 1100 East Jersey Street, Elizabeth. (908) 355-0077.ELMWOOD PLAYHOUSE ''Minnie's Boys,'' Marx Brothers musical. Through June 10. Fridays and Saturdays at 8:30 p.m.; today and June 4 at 2:30 p.m. Tickets: $17; $15 for students and older people. 10 Park Street, Nyack, N.Y. (914) 353-1313.GEORGE STREET PLAYHOUSE ''Ancestral Voices,'' by A. R. Gurney. Through next Sunday. Tuesday through Saturday at 8 p.m.; Saturday at 2 p.m.; next Sunday and 2 p.m. and 7 p.m. Tickets: $22 to $40. The Next Stage Festival. Through June 11. ''1001 Nights.'' Friday at 8 p.m.; Saturday at 7 p.m. Tickets: $10. 9 Livingston Avenue, New Brunswick. (732) 246-7717.HELEN HAYES PERFORMING ARTS CENTER ''Shirley Valentine,'' starring Loretta Swit.  Final performance today. Tickets: $21 to $36. 117 Main Street, Nyack, N.Y. (914) 358-6333.HILLCREST COMMUNITY CENTER ''A Bad Year for Tomatoes,'' performed by the West Milford Players. Today at 2 p.m. Tickets: $10; $8 for older people and students. ''Kaleidoscope,'' a collection of scenes and songs. Friday and Saturday at 8 p.m. Tickets: $5. 1810 Macopin Road, West Milford. (973) 728-0027.HUNTERDON HILLS PLAYHOUSE ''Mary, Mary,'' Jean Kerr's comedy. Through June 30. Monday through Saturday luncheon performances at 11 a.m., $35.50 and $39.50; Saturdays at 6:30 p.m., $43 and $47; Sundays at 3:30 p.m., $41.50 and $45.50. Reservations required.  Exit 12 off Routes 78 and 22, Perryville. (800) 447-7313.KELSEY THEATER ''2000 Footsteps!'' performed by the Mercer Dance Ensemble. Friday and Saturday at 8 p.m.; next Sunday at 3 p.m. Tickets: $9 to $18. Mercer County Community College, 1200 Trenton Road, Trenton. (609) 584-9444.LUNA STAGE ''Jaques Brel Is Alive and Well and Living in Paris,'' 1960's revue. Today at 2 p.m. Tickets: $22; $18 for students and older people. 7 Oak Place, Montclair. (973) 744-3309.McCARTER THEATER ''Night Governess,'' world premiere musical by Polly Penn. Today at 2 p.m. and 7:30 p.m.. Tickets: $27 to $39.  Center for the Performing Arts, 91 University Place, Princeton. (609) 258-2787.MONTCLAIR HIGH SCHOOL ''Stars Come Out for Kids,'' benefit featuring Savion Glover, tap-dancer. Today at 4 p.m. Tickets: $15 to $100. 100 Chestnut Street, Montclair. (973) 509-4500.MURDER TO GO THEATER ''Killing Mr. Withers.'' Ongoing. Fridays and Saturdays at 7:30 p.m. Tickets: $45 on Fridays; $48 on Saturdays, includes four-course dinner. Il Giardino, Cedar Knolls. (973) 301-0562.NEW JERSEY PERFORMING ARTS CENTER ''Dance Jam,'' featuring the American Youth Dance Company, Dance Innovations and Newark Arts High School Dance Ensemble. Today at 2 p.m. Tickets: $18; $9 for children. New Jersey Ballet performs ''For Ella,'' ''Western Sweet'' and other selections. Thursday at 7 p.m. Tickets: $20 to $40. ''Hispanic Youth Showcase.'' Friday at 7 p.m. Tickets: $12; $7 for children. Prudential Hall. 1 Center Street, Newark. (888) 466-5722.NEW JERSEY REPERTORY COMPANY ''Octet,'' Mark Dunn comic-drama. Friday through June 18. Thursdays through Saturdays at 8 p.m.; Sundays at 2 p.m. Tickets: $25.  Opening night on Friday with reception: $35.  Lumia Theater, 179 Broadway, Long Branch. (732) 229-3166.PAPER MILL PLAYHOUSE ''The Student Prince.'' Through Saturday. Wednesday and Friday at 8 p.m.; Thursday at 2 and 8 p.m.; Saturday at 2:30 and 8 p.m. Tickets: $36 to $60. Brookside Drive, Millburn. (973) 376-4343.PLAYWRIGHTS THEATER OF NEW JERSEY ''Radium Girls,'' by Dolores Whiskeyman. Through next Sunday. Thursday and Friday at 8 p.m.; Saturday at 2 p.m. and 8 p.m.; Sunday at 3 p.m.. Tickets: $18; $16. 33 Green Village Road, Madison. (973) 514-1787, ext. 30.PRINCETON UNIVERSITY RICHARDSON AUDITORIUM ''A Midsummer Night's Dream,'' performed by the Princeton University Orchestra, Michael Pratt, conductor, and the Princeton Shakespeare Company, Thomas P. Roche, director. Thursday and Friday at 8 p.m. Tickets: $5. Alexander Hall, Princeton. (609) 258-5000.STATE THEATER ''The Red Balloon'' performed by Scotland's theater company, Visible Fictions. Today at 1 p.m. and 4 p.m. Tickets: $12 and $14. 15 Livingston Avenue, New Brunswick. (732) 246-7469.STOCKTON PERFORMING ARTS CENTER ''Ellis Island,'' an American Family Theater production. Friday at 10:30 a.m. and noon. Tickets: $6. Jim Leeds Road, Pomona. (609) 652-4527.TRI-STATE ACTORS THEATER ''Collected Stories,'' a drama by Donald Margulies. Today at 3 p.m. Tickets: $13; $11 for students and older people. Garris Center Theater, Broad Street, Branchville. (888) 840-7889.WESTMINSTER CHOIR COLLEGE OF RIDER UNIVERSITY ''The Play's the Thing,'' based on Shakespeare's ''King Lear.'' Today at 4 p.m. Tickets: $5. The Playhouse, 101 Walnut Lane, Princeton. (609) 219-2001.Museums and GalleriesABC GALLERY ''Nature's Mysteries, Oils by Edith Skiba.'' Tomorrow through July 1. Opening reception: Thursday, 6 p.m. to 8 p.m.  Hours: Monday through Thursday, 1 to 9 p.m.; Friday, 1 to 5 p.m.; Saturday, 10 a.m. to 5 p.m. Lambertville Public Library, 6 Lilly Street, Lambertville. (609) 397-0275.AMERICAN LABOR MUSEUM ''Vital Vestiges,'' a photodocumentary of the Paterson historic district's ruins. ''What is Industrial Hygiene?'' photo and illustration exhibit on loan from the American Industrial Hygiene Association in Virginia. Through June 25. Hours: Wednesdays through Saturdays, 1 to 4 p.m.; other times by appointment. Botto House National Landmark, 83 Norwood Street, Haledon. (973) 595-7953.ART FORMS Paul Bennett Hirsch: One Person Show. Through Saturday. Hours: Tuesdays through Fridays, 10 a.m. to 6 p.m.; Saturdays, 10 a.m. to 5 p.m.; Sundays, 1 p.m. to 4 p.m. 16 Monmouth Street, Red Bank. (732) 530-4330.ARTWORKS GALLERY ''Representational Cross Section,'' Spring Invitational show. Through June 11. Hours: Tuesdays through Fridays, 11 a.m. to 4 p.m.; Sundays 1 to 4 p.m. 19 Everett Alley, Trenton. (609) 394-9436.ATRIUM ART GALLERY ''Five Views,'' featuring landscape photography. Through July 21.  Hours: Mondays through Fridays, 9 a.m. to 5 p.m. Morris County Administration and Records Building, Morristown. (973) 285-6120.BELSKIE MUSEUM OF ART AND SCIENCE Anna Fabris, paintings. Through May 31. Hours: Mondays and Wednesdays, noon to 9 p.m.; Tuesdays, Thursdays and Fridays, noon to 5 p.m. Closter Public Library, 280 High Street, Closter. (201) 768-0286.HIRAM BLAUVELT ART MUSEUM ''The Nature of Black and White,'' wildlife paintings, drawings and sculpture. Through June 11. Hours: Wednesdays through Fridays, 10 a.m. to 4 p.m.; Saturdays and Sundays, 2 to 5 p.m. 705 Kinderkamack Road, Oradell. (201) 261-0012.BRION GALLERIES ''New Work by Oil Painter Cathy Lang.'' Through June 25. Hours: Wednesdays and Thursdays, 10 a.m. to 5 p.m.; Fridays and Saturdays, 9 a.m. to 6 p.m.; Sundays, 11 a.m. to 6 p.m. 1293 Route 179, Lambertville. (609) 397-7030.CERULEAN FINE ARTS GALLERY ''The Art of the Portrait.'' Through June 10. Hours: Tuedays through Fridays, 11:30 a.m. to 6 p.m.; Saturdays, 4 to 9 p.m. Headquarters Plaza Mall, Speedwell Avenue (Route 202), Morristown. (973) 267-3730.EVERGREEN GALLERY ''Intimate Landscapes in oil,'' by Marie Salvato. Through June 3. Hours: Mondays through Saturdays, 10 a.m. to 5 p.m. 308 Morris Avenue, Spring Lake. (732) 449-4488.EXTENSION GALLERY Petro Hul's ''Recent Work.'' Through June 1. Hours: Mondays through Thursdays, 10 a.m. to 4 p.m.; other times by appointment. 60 Ward Avenue Extension, Mercerville. (609) 890-7777.FAIRLEIGH DICKINSON UNIVERSITY ''Inner and Outer Reality,'' mixed media exhibit, by Ruth Rintel. Through June 2. Hours: Mondays through Fridays, 9 a.m. to 9 p.m.; Saturdays, 9 a.m. to 2 p.m. Edward Williams Gallery, 150 Kotte Place, Hackensack. (201) 692-2449.GALLERY OF SOUTH ORANGE ''Death Died,'' mixed-media sculpture by Ela Sha; ''Portals,'' collages by Ellen Weisbord; and ''Art as a Purpose,'' mixed-media on paper and oil pastels by Lynn Foster. Through June 4 Hours: Wednesdays and Thursdays, 10 a.m. to 2 p.m. and 4 to 6 p.m.; Saturdays and Sundays, 1 to 4 p.m. Baird Center, 5 Mead Street, South Orange. (973) 378-7754.GROUNDS FOR SCULPTURE Salute to Roberta Peters, soprano, including performances by Helen Todd, soprano, and Richard Hobson, baritone. Today at 3 p.m. (609) 581-7200.  ''Spring Exhibition'' featuring Red Grooms: sculpture; Bill Barrett: sculpture and painting; and Andrzej Pitynski: partisans.  Through July 2. Hours: Thursdays through Saturdays, 10 a.m. to 4 p.m.; Tuesday and Wednesday by appointment. 18 Fairgrounds Road, Hamilton Township. (609) 586-0616.GUILD OF CREATIVE ART ''Garden Travels,'' watercolor paintings by Sally Brandenburg. Through June 1. Hours: daily, noon to 4:30 p.m. 620 Broad Street, Shrewsbury. (732) 741-1441.JOHN HARMS CENTER FOR THE ARTS ''Arborealis,'' photography by Cali Gorevic. Through Wednesday. Hours: Monday through Wednesday, 11 a.m. to 6 p.m. 30 North Van Brunt Street, Englewood. (201) 567-3600.HUNTERDON MUSEUM OF ART ''Robert Forman: 'Narratives in Thread' and 'Huichol Art in the Collection of Robert Forman.' ''  Through June 18. Hours: Tuesdays through Sundays, 11 a.m. to 5 p.m. 7 Lower Center Street, Clinton. (908) 735-8415.J.C.C. ON THE PALISADES ''Mysticism and Mosaics,'' an exhibit of lithographs, seriagraphs, prints and original mosaics by Michoel Muchnik, artist. Through May 30. Hours: Monday through Thursday, 9 a.m to 10 p.m.; Friday and Sunday, 9 a.m. to 5 p.m. 411 East Clinton Avenue, Tenafly. (201) 569-7900, extension 433.JERSEY CITY MUSEUM ''Joan Semmel: Recent Paintings.'' Through June 3. Hours: Tuesdays through Saturdays, 10:30 a.m. to 5 p.m.; Wednesdays, 10:30 a.m.to 8 p.m. 472 Jersey Avenue, Jersey City. (201) 547-4514.KERYGMA GALLERY ''Flowers: In the Still Life and Landscape,'' group show of gallery artists. Through Saturday. Hours: Tuesday through Saturday, 10 a.m. to 5 p.m.; today, 1 to 5 p.m. 38 Oak Street, Ridgewood. (201) 444-5510.LAUREL TRACEY GALLERY ''Childs Play,'' recent paintings by Dee Jenkins. Through June 10. Hours: Tuesdays through Saturdays, 10:30 a.m. to 5:30 p.m.; Sundays, 12:30 p.m. to 4:30 p.m. 10 White Street, Red Bank. (732) 224-0760.LAWRENCEVILLE SCHOOL John Register: A Retrospective. Through June 3. Hours: Mondays, Tuesdays, Thursdays and Fridays, 9 a.m. to noon and 1 to 4:30 p.m.; Wednesdays and Saturdays, 9 a.m. to noon. Gruss Center of Visual Arts, the Rotunda Gallery and the Marguerite and James Hutchins Gallery, Lawrenceville. (609) 620-6026.LIBERTY SCIENCE CENTER ''Lakota Wolf Preserve,'' photographs by Dan Bacon. Through June 18. Hours: Tuesdays through Sundays, 9:30 to 5:30 p.m. Environment Level, Liberty State Park, 251 Phillip Street, Jersey City. (201) 451-0006, extension 295.MACCULLOCH HALL HISTORICAL MUSEUM ''Woven Into Words: Coverlets in America.'' Through Aug. 13. Admission: $3; $2 for older people and students. Hours: Wednesdays, Thursdays and Sundays, 1 to 4 p.m. 45 Macculloch Avenue, Morristown. (973) 538-2404.MARSHA CHILD CONTEMPORARY ''Worlds on Paper,'' an exhibition of paintings, drawings, etchings, mezzotints, and more by artists from a dozen countries. Through Saturday. Hours: Tuesday through Saturday, 10 a.m. to 5:30 p.m.; other times by appointment. 220 Alexander Street, Princeton. (609) 497-7330.MIDDAY GALLERY ''Family, Friends and Favorite Places,'' exhibition of art works by Helen Frank. Through June 11. Hours: Tuesday through Saturday, 10 a.m. to 5 p.m. 8 North Dean Street, Englewood. (201) 568-4454.MONMOUTH COUNTY HISTORICAL ASSOCIATION ''Angels in the Household: Childhood Life in Monmouth County, 1700-1920.'' Through June 30. Hours: Tuesdays through Saturdays, 10 a.m. to 4 p.m.; Sundays, 1 to 4 p.m. Admission: $2; $1.50 for older people; $1 for those ages 6 to 18; free for children under 6. 70 Court Street, Freehold. (732) 462-1466.MONTCLAIR ART MUSEUM ''Untamed Spirits: Animal Imagery in Native American Art.'' Through July 30. Will Barnet: A Timeless World. Through August 20. Hours: Tuesdays, Wednesdays, Fridays and Saturdays, 11 a.m. to 5 p.m.; Thursdays and Sundays, 1 to 5 p.m. Admission: $5; $4 for older people and students; free for members and children under 12. 3 South Mountain Avenue, Montclair. (973) 746-5555.MORRIS MUSEUM ''Fresh Perspectives.'' Through June 5.''The Collected Century, 1900 to 2000.'' Through June 11. ''Ice Age,'' featuring casts of mammals from the Pleistocene epoch. Through June 18. Hours: Sundays, 1 to 5 p.m.; Tuesdays through Saturdays, 10 a.m. to 5 p.m.; Thursdays to 8 p.m. Admission: $5; $3 for older people and children under age 3. 6 Normandy Heights Road, Morristown. (973) 538-0454.MOSTLY GLASS ''A Spectrum of Glass Art.'' Through May 31. Hours: Mondays through Saturdays, 10 a.m. to 6 p.m. 3 East Palisade Avenue, Englewood. (201) 816-1222.MUSEUM OF THE AMERICAN HUNGARIAN FOUNDATION ''Munkacsy in America,'' paintings by Mihaly Munkacsy. Through June 18. Donation: $5. Hours: Tuesdays through Saturdays, 11 a.m. to 4 p.m.; Sundays, 1 to 4 p.m. 300 Somerset Street, New Brunswick. (732) 846-5777.NABISCO GALLERY ''Windows on My World,'' exhibit showcasing acrylic paintings, computer art and sculpture by students in the Arts Access program of the Matheny School and Hospital, Peapack. Tomorrow through June 21. Hours: daily, noon to 4 p.m. 100 DeForest Avenue, East Hanover. (973) 503-2000.NEW JERSEY CENTER FOR VISUAL ARTS  ''Forgotten Places,'' recent paintings and digital prints by Liz Demaree. Through June 9.  ''On the Horizon: Landscape at the Millennium.'' Through June 11. Hours: Mondays through Fridays, noon to 4 p.m.; Thursdays, 7 to 9 p.m.; Saturdays and Sundays, 2 to 4 p.m. Palmer Gallery, 68 Elm Street, Summit. (908) 273-9121.NEW JERSEY CITY UNIVERSITY ''Spirituality in the Landscape,'' an exhibit of paintings by Patti Barham Campbell. Through June 2. Hours: Mondays through Fridays, 11 a.m. to 4 p.m.; other times by appointment. Lemmerman Gallery, Hepburn Hall, Room 323; 2039 Kennedy Boulevard, Jersey City. (201) 200-3246.NEW JERSEY HISTORICAL SOCIETY ''History's Mysteries,'' interactive exhibition. Through June. ''Dining In, Dining Out,'' featuring photographs, video clips, rare silverware, period furniture and 18th-century cookbooks. Through summer, 2001. ''Pride of Newark: Baseball's Bears and Eagles,'' about the history of baseball in Newark. Through Summer 2001. Hours: Tuesdays through Saturdays, 10 a.m. to 5 p.m. 52 Park Place, Newark. (973) 596-8500.NEW JERSEY STATE MUSEUM ''Forgotten Gateway: The Abandoned Building of Ellis Island,'' photographs by Larry Racioppo.  Through June 30. ''Nikon's Small World, 1999-2000.'' Through Tuesday. ''Building a Collection: Fine Art at the New Jersey State Museum.'' Saturday through August 20. Call for tickets: (800) 766-6048. Hours: Tuesdays through Saturdays, 9 a.m. to 4:45 p.m.; Sundays, noon to 5 p.m. Free. 205 West State Street, Trenton. (609) 292-6464.NEWARK MUSEUM ''The Art of Ink in American 2000: International Contemporary Calligraphy.'' Through July 9. ''Year of the Dragon:  The Calligraphy of Wang Fangyu.'' Through November 12. ''From Tabletop to TV Tray: China and Glass in America, 1880-1980.'' Through June 18. ''Needless Necessity: Jewelry, Silver and Personal Meaning.'' Through December. Hours: Wednesdays through Sundays, noon to 5 p.m.; Thursdays (after hours) until 8:30 p.m. 49 Washington Street, Newark. (973) 596-6550.NOYES MUSEUM OF ART Inspired by Nature series, featuring ''Recreating Flowers: The Glass Wonders of Paul J. Stankard.'' Through Sept. 3 ''Capturing the Jersey Shore: Works of Anthony J. Rudisill.'' Through Sept. 10. ''Craft Concepts 2000: Treasures of Tomorrow.'' Friday through June 4; special preview on Thursday, from 6:30 p.m. to 9:30 p.m. Hours: Wednesdays through Sundays, 11 a.m. to 4 p.m. Admission: $3; $2 for older people and students. Lily Lake Road, Oceanville. (609) 652-8848.OCEAN COUNTY HISTORICAL SOCIETY ''Ocean County From the Explorers to 1950,'' featuring photographs, documents, paintings and objects illustrating the county's history. Through Oct. 31. Hours: Tuesdays and Thursdays, 1 to 3 p.m.; Saturdays, 10 a.m. to 4 p.m. 26 Hadley Avenue, Toms River. (732) 341-1880.PASSAIC COUNTY COMMUNITY COLLEGE Jessica Fromm: Recent Work. Through June 22. Hours: Mondays through Fridays, 9 a.m. to 9 p.m.; Saturdays, 9 a.m. to 5 p.m. Broadway and LRC Galleries, Broadway and Memorial Drive, Paterson. (973) 684-5448.WILLIAM PATERSON UNIVERSITY Three Generations of Hobart Family Photographers.  Through June 4. Hours: Mondays through Fridays, 10 a.m. to 5 p.m. Hobart Manor, 300 Pompton Road, Wayne. (973) 720-2825.PETERS VALLEY CRAFT EDUCATION CENTER ''Art in the Open: The Peters Valley Gallery Without Walls.'' Through June 30. Group exhibition. 19 Kuhn Road, Layton. (973) 948-5200.PLAINSBORO PUBLIC LIBRARY GALLERY May Madness Invitational Salon Show.  Through June 4. Hours: Mondays and Fridays, at 9 a.m. to 5:30 p.m.; Tuesdays through Thursdays, 9 a.m. to 8:30 p.m.; Saturdays, 10 a.m. to 5 p.m.; Sundays, 1 p.m. to 5 p.m. 641 Plainsboro Road, Plainsboro. (609) 275-2897.PRINCETON UNIVERSITY ART MUSEUM ''Curator's Choice: Recent Acquisitions.'' Through June 6. Photographs by Barbara Bosworth. Through June 18. ''A Window Into Collecting American Folk Art: The Edward Duff Balken Collection.'' Through June 18.  ''Flora and Fauna in Chinese Painting.'' Through July 30. Yayoi Kusama: Early Drawings From the Collection of Richard Castellane. Through July 30. Hours: Tuesdays through Saturdays, 10 a.m. to 5 p.m.; Sundays, 1 to 5 p.m. Princeton campus. (609) 258-3788.PUFFIN CULTURAL FORUM ''Terra Infirma:  Art, Activisim and the Environment.'' Through June 24. Opening reception: today, 2 p.m. Hours: Wednesday through Saturday, 1 to 5 p.m.; or by appointment. 20 East Oakdene Avenue, Teaneck. (201) 836-8923.RIVERRUN GALLERY Abstraction 2000.  Through June 10. Hours: Sundays, noon to 5 p.m.; Mondays and Wednesdays through Saturdays, 10 a.m. 5 p.m. 287 South Main Street (Route 29), Lambertville. (609) 397-3349.RUTGERS UNIVERSITY - CAMDEN ''New Artists 2000,'' including paintings, sculptures, graphic designs and more by 26 seniors.  Through Saturday. Hours: Monday through Saturday, 10 a.m. to 4 p.m.; Thursday until 8 p.m. Stedman Gallery, Third Street between Cooper Street and Benjamin Franklin Bridge, Camden. (856) 225-6350.SCHERING-PLOUGH CORPORATION ''At the Shore with Dick LaBonte'' exhibition.  Through June 30. Hours: Monday through Friday, 10 a.m. to 4 p.m. Gallery, 1 Giralda Farms, Madison. (973) 822-7000.SIMON GALLERY Anne Raymond and Alice Zinnes, paintings. Tuesday through June 24. Opening reception: Thursday, 6 p.m.to 8 p.m.  Hours: Tuesdays through Fridays, noon to 6 p.m.; Saturdays, noon to 5 p.m.; other times by appointment. 48 Bank Street, Morristown. (973) 538-5456.SKULSKI ART GALLERY Maria Fuks, paintings. Through June 16. Hours: Tuesdays through Fridays, 5 to 9 p.m.; Saturdays, 10 a.m. to 3 p.m. Polish Cultural Foundation, 177 Broadway, Clark. (732) 382-7197.SPRINGFIELD PUBLIC LIBRARY ''Paper Poetry.'' Through June 1. Hours: Mondays, Wednesdays and Thursdays, 10 a.m. to 8:30 p.m.; Tuesdays, Fridays and Saturdays, 10 a.m. to 4:30 p.m.; Sundays, 1 p.m. to 3:30 p.m. Donald B. Palmer Museum, 66 Mountain Avenue, Springfield. (973) 376-4930.SUMEI MULTIDISCIPLINARY ARTS CENTER Sumei National Juried Print Exhibit 2000, dedicated to the memory of Belkis Ayon, a Cuban printmaker. Through June 1. Hours: Wednesdays, 1 p.m. to 6 p.m.; Saturdays and Sundays, 11 a.m. to 6 p.m.; or call for appointment. 19 Liberty Street, at the corner of Lafayette Street, Newark. (973) 643-7883.TOWNSHIP GALLERY Kathleen Havens, paintings. Through July 7. Hours: Mondays through Fridays, 9 a.m. to 4 p.m. Opening reception: today, 4:30 p.m. to 7 p.m. Free. Chatham Township Municipal Building, 58 Meyersville Road, Chatham. (973) 635-2482.TOWNSHIP OF LEBANON MUSEUM OF NEW HAMPTON ''Landscapes and Seascapes,'' featuring landscapes of Hunterdon and Warren Counties by Madeline Taranto, artist.  Through May 30. Hours: Tuesdays and Thursdays, 9:30 a.m. to 5 p.m.; Saturdays, 1 p.m. to 5 p.m. (908) 537-6464.TRENTON CITY MUSEUM ''Guccione, the Painter: A Retrospective of His Life's Work.'' Through June 11. Hours: Tuesdays through Saturdays, 11 a.m. to 3 p.m.; Sundays, 2 to 4 p.m. Ellarslie, Cadwalader Park, Trenton. (609) 989-3632.WHEATON VILLAGE ''American Glass: 1900-2000,'' featuring more than 100 industrial and decorative pieces. Through Oct. 22. ''2000 Flowers.'' Saturday through June 11. Hours: Wednesdays through Sundays, 10 a.m. to 5 p.m. Admission: $7; $6 for older people; $3.50 for students. Exit 26, Route 55, Millville. (800) 998-4552, extension 2756.WYCKOFF GALLERY ''Spring Traditions.'' Through May 31. Hours: Tuesdays through Saturdays, 11:30 a.m. to 4:30 p.m. 648 Wyckoff Avenue, Wyckoff. (201) 891-7436.YOGI BERRA MUSEUM ''Glove Story,'' interactive exhibit on the evolution of the baseball glove, including 19th century rare vintage models and hands-on replicas. Through June 26. Artifacts from the life of the baseball player and exhibits on the history of the Yankees, baseball in New Jersey, Negro Leagues, evolution of equipment, and baseball during World War II. Ongoing. Hours: Wednesdays through Sundays, noon to 5 p.m. Tickets: $4; $2 for children. Montclair State University, 8 Quarry Road, Little Falls. (973) 655-2377.For ChildrenBARNES AND NOBLE Children's Storytime and Tea Party. Tuesday and Wednesday at 10 a.m. Pre-registration is required. Free. 160 Route 17 North, Paramus. (201) 261-6995.BERGEN COUNTY Y JEWISH COMMUNITY CENTER Rich Snedaker's Sport-Specific Conditioning Clinic. Today, 11 a.m. to noon. For kids in grades 3 through 12. Fee: $5 for non-members. Super Club for kids in grades two through four. Tuesday, 6:15 p.m. to 7:45 p.m.  Fee: $12 for members; $18 for non-members.  Registration is required. 605 Pascack Road, Washington Township. (201) 666-6610, extension 210.FORUM THEATER COMPANY ''Narnia; the Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe,'' based on the ''Chronicles of Narnia'' by C. S. Lewis. Through June 10. Saturdays at 11 a.m. Tickets: $9. 314 Main Street, Metuchen. (732) 548-0582.JOHN HARMS CENTER FOR THE ARTS ''Ramona Quimby'' performed by Theatreworks/ USA. Today at noon and 3 p.m. Tickets: $12. 30 North Van Brunt Street, Englewood. (201) 567-3600.HUNTERDON MUSEUM OF ART ''Spring Fever,'' workshops and classes for children and adults, including KinderArt, Cartooning Around, Collage Kids and more. Through June 8. Hours: Tuesdays through Sundays, 11 a.m. to 5 p.m. 7 Lower Center Street, Clinton. (908) 735-8415.MORRIS COUNTY PARK COMMISSION Preschooler/Parent nature walks. ''Bats,'' today at 2 p.m. Fee: $5.Hours: daily, 9 a.m. to 4:30 p.m. Great Swamp Outdoor Education Center, 247 Southern Boulevard, Chatham Township. (973) 635-6629.NEWARK MUSEUM ''Where in the Universe Is Carmen Sandiego?'' at the Alice and Leonard Dreyfuss Planetarium. Through October. Saturdays and Sundays, 1 p.m. and 3 p.m. Tickets: $3; $2 for members; $1 for children and older people. 49 Washington Street, Newark. (973) 596-6355.NEW JERSEY CHILDREN'S MUSEUM ''Space Weekend.'' Today, 9 a.m. to 5 p.m. Daily programs: ''Fairy Tale Play'' at 10:30 a.m.; ''Storytime'' at noon; ''Special Craft Project'' at 2:30 p.m. Permanent exhibits: child-sized grocery store, pizzeria and castle, prehistoric cave, computers and more. Tickets: $8. 599 Industrial Avenue, Paramus. (201) 262-5151.NEW JERSEY STATE MUSEUM ''Laser Millennium 3-D,'' planetarium laser light show. Saturdays and Sundays at 1 and 3 p.m. Through June 25. Tickets: $6 includes 3-D glasses. 205 West State Street, Trenton. (609) 292-6464.PAPER MILL PLAYHOUSE ''Peter and the Wolf,'' performed by the Pushcart Players. Today at 10 a.m. Tickets: $8 and $9. Brookside Drive, Millburn. (973) 376-4343.RITZ THEATER ''The Fantasticks,'' musical. Through Saturday. Today at 2 p.m.; Wednesday at 7:30 p.m.; Friday and Saturday at 8 p.m. Tickets: $12.50 to $16. 915 White Horse Pike, Oaklyn. (856) 858-5230.STUDIO PLAYERS Magic Trunk Children's Theater presents ''Who's Afraid of the Big Bad Wolf.'' Today at 1:30 p.m. and 3:30 p.m.  Tickets: $6. 14 Alvin Place, Montclair. (973) 744-9752.Spoken WordBARNES & NOBLE Jerome L. Cohen, author, will discuss and sign his book ''The Gravestone Accord.'' Friday at 7:30 p.m. Free. 1180 Raritan Road, Clark. (732) 574-1818.BOOKENDS BOOKSTORE John Sandford will discuss and sign his book, ''Easy Prey.'' Today at 1 p.m. Anne Edwards will discuss and sign her book, ''Ever After: Diana and the Life She Led.'' Wednesday at 7 p.m. Yogi Berra will discuss and sign his book ''The Yogi Book: I Really Didn't Say Everything I Said.'' Thursday at 7 p.m. 232 East Ridgewood Avenue, Ridgewood. (201) 445-0726.BORDERS BOOKS AND MUSIC Bruce D. Schneider, Ph.D., will discuss and sign his book, ''Relax, You're Already Perfect: 10 Spiritual Lessons . . . to Remember.'' Wednesday at 7:30 p.m. 515 Route 73 South, Unit 1, Marlton. (609) 985-5080.EAST BRUNSWICK LIBRARY Laurie Lico Albanese will discuss her book, ''Lynelle by the Sea.'' Tomorrow at 8 p.m. Free. 2 Jean Walling Civic Center Drive, East Brunswick. (732) 390-6950.ENGLEWOOD PUBLIC LIBRARY The Bergen Poets. Wednesday at 8 p.m. Susan Dworkin, writer, editor and producer will do readings from Edna Ferber's ''Fanny Herself.''  Wednesday at 8 p.m. Free. 31 Engle Street, Englewood. (201) 568-2215.WESTIN HOTEL Joy Loverde, author of ''The Complete Eldercare Planner: Where to Start, Questions to Ask, How to Find Help,'' will discuss her insights with families in a seminar sponsored by Arden Courts Alzheimer's Assisted Living. Thursday, 7 p.m. to 9 p.m. Free.  2 Whippany Road, Morristown. (973) 581-1800.Etc.FLAT ROCK BROOK NATURE CENTER Nature Day Spring Festival. Today, 11 a.m. to 4 p.m.  Fee: $3; $1 for children. ''Spring Strolls,'' guided mile walk. Wednesday, 10 to 11 a.m. Fee: $3. Pre-registration required. ''Sunset Hiking Series.'' Tuesdays through May 30, 6:30 p.m. Fee: $3. 443 Van Nostrand Avenue, Englewood. (201) 567-1265.FREEHOLD ANTIQUEFEST The Freehold Center Partnership's Spring AntiqueFest. Today, 10 a.m. to 5 p.m. Vendors will line West Main Street between Court and Throckmorton Streets. (732) 946-2711.GIANT MODEL AIR SHOW Annual Giant Scale Model Airplane ''Fly-in.'' Saturday and next Sunday, beginning at 9 a.m. Warren Kruse field in the Assunpink Wildlife Management Area, near Imlaystown. Free. (609) 409-7530.HUNTERDON HISTORICAL MUSEUM ''Irish Day by the River,'' a celebration of Irish heritage, culture and music. Today, 11 a.m. to 6 p.m. Tickets: $6; free for children under 12.  Red Mill and Mulligan Quarry (from Routes 78, 31 and 22), Clinton. (908) 735-4101.JURIED AMERICAN INDIAN ARTS FESTIVAL 150 fine American Indian artists and entertainers, representing 50 tribes. Saturday, next Sunday and May 29, 11 a.m. to 6 p.m. Sponsored by the Powhatan Renape Nation. Admission: $10; $5 for children, 6 to 12, and older people; free for children under six. (609) 261-4747.MONTCLAIR STATE UNIVERSITY ArtsFest 2000, featuring Brazil 500 painting exhibition. Tomorrow through July 21. Art Gallery, Life Hall. Valley Road and Normal Avenue, Upper Montclair. (973) 655-4452.MORRIS COUNTY PARKS Night Walk. Saturday at 8 p.m. Free. Great Swamp Outdoor Education Center, 247 Southern Boulevard, Chatham. (973) 635-6629.SOMERSET COUNTY PARK COMMISSION 20th Annual Carving and Wildlife Art Show and Sale. Today, 10 a.m. to 5 p.m. Free. 190 Lord Stirling Road, Basking Ridge. (908) 766-2489. ''Woodland Walks at Leonard J. Buck Garden,'' guided tour. Today at 2 p.m. Admission: $3; $2 for students and older people. Visitor Center, 11 Layton Road, Far Hills. (908) 234-2677.TRAILSIDE NATURE AND SCIENCE CENTER The Union County Master Gardeners' annual Spring Garden Fair and Plant Sale. Today, noon to 5 p.m. Free. ''Become a Lunatic,'' planetarium show. Today at 2 p.m. ''Stellar Spring Skies,'' planetarium show. Today at 3:30 p.m. Admission: $3; $2.55 for older people. ''Frogs by Flashlight.'' Wednesday, 7 p.m. to 8 p.m. Fee: $5; pre-registration required. 452 New Providence Road, Mountainside. (908) 789-3670.VERONA PARK Fine Art and Crafts Show. Today, 10 a.m. to 5 p.m. Corner of Pleasant Valley Way and Bloomfield Avenue, Verona. (908) 874-5247.At the CasinosAll tickets are available through Ticketmaster, (800) 736-1420.BALLY'S PARK PLACE ''Legends in Concert,'' impersonations of Stevie Wonder, Little Richard, Elvis Presley, Linda Ronstadt and Barbara Streisand. Mondays through Thursdays at 3:30 and 7:30 p.m.; Saturdays at 8 and 10:30 p.m.; Sundays at 7:30 and 10 p.m. Tickets: $15 to $25. Park Cabaret, Boardwalk and Park Place. (800) 225-5977.CLARIDGE HOTEL ''Dream, Dream, Dream,'' featuring songs by the Everly Brothers. Through June 17. Monday through Thursday at 8 p.m.; Saturday at 7:30 p.m. and 10 p.m.; Sunday at 7 p.m. Tickets: $15, Sunday through Thursday; $19, Saturday. Palace Theater, Boardwalk and Park Place. (609) 340-3700.RESORTS CASINO HOTEL Tracy Lawrence with guests, Redmon and Vale. Friday at 10 p.m. Tickets: $25 and $35. The Theater, 1133 Boardwalk. (888) 771-1786.TROPICANA Legends of the Catskills with Freddy Roman and Dick Capri, with special guest Jack Carter. Today at 7 p.m. Tickets:  $20 to $30. ''Latin Fever.'' Through June 17. Mondays, Tuesdays and Thursdays at 8 p.m.; Wednesdays at 3:30 and 7:30 p.m.; Fridays at 9 p.m.; Saturdays at 8 and 11:30 p.m.; Sundays at 7 p.m. Tickets: $9.90. Boardwalk and Brighton Avenue. (609) 340-4020.TRUMP MARINA Big Bad Voodoo Daddy. Friday at 10 p.m.; Saturday at 9 p.m. Tickets:  $26.50. Grand Cayman. Little Feat. Next Sunday at 9 p.m. Tickets: $35. The Shell. Huron Avenue and Brigantine Boulevard. (800) 777-8477.A guide to cultural and recreational goings-on around the state this week. Items may be submitted by mail to On the Towns, Sunday New Jersey Section, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y. 10036; by fax to (212) 556-7219, or by e-mail to njtowns@nytimes.com.MUSICALBERT MUSIC HALL Bluegrass Root II. Today, 1 p.m. to 5 p.m. Free. 125 Wells Mills Road, Waretown. (609) 971-1593.BLOOMFIELD MIDDLE SCHOOL Farewell concert of Edward J. Napiowocki, music director and conductor of the Bloomfield Symphony Orchestra. Today at 3 p.m. Suggested donation: $3. 60 Huck Road. (908) 686-1224.CALVARY EPISCOPAL CHURCH Calvary Chorale performs three Bach cantatas (Nos. 4, 78, 79) with orchestra and soloists. Today at 4 p.m. Freewill offering. 31 Woodland Avenue, Summit. (908) 277-1547.CHRIST CHURCH Spring Choral Concert: Christian and Jewish Sacred Music. Today at 5 p.m. Tickets: $7; $5 for students and older people. 5 Paterson Street, New Brunswick. (732) 545-6262.THE CORNERSTONE Mike LeDonne Trio.  Wednesday, 7:30 p.m. to 11:30 p.m. Jill McCarren Quartet with Andy Fusco. Friday, 9 p.m. to 1 a.m. Warren Chiasson Quartet. Saturday, 9 p.m. to 1 a.m. 25 New Street, Metuchen. (732) 549-5306.JOHN HARMS CENTER FOR THE ARTS ''Fun with Jazz and the Classics,'' featuring Bucky Pizzarelli, jazz guitarist, joined by the Sutton Ensemble. Tuesday at 8 p.m. Tickets: $20; $18 for older people; $15 for students. 30 North Van Brunt Street, Englewood. (201) 567-3600.HOLY TRINITY R. C. CHURCH The Madrigal Singers will present ''Visions of Spring,'' paired with poetry selections read by Judy Sullivan. Today at 7 p.m. Corner of Westfield Avenue and First Street, Westfield. (908) 233-1570.J. C. C. THURNAUER SCHOOL OF MUSIC Annual Faculty Showcase Recital. Today at 4:30 p.m.  Donations accepted. Eric Brown Theater, 411 East Clinton Avenue, Tenafly. (201) 569-7900, extension 235.JOE'S MILL HILL SALOON The Bob Smith Trio, jazz and blues. Friday at 9 p.m. Dick Gratton with Carci Deising, vocals. Saturday at 8:30 p.m. Broad and Market Streets, Trenton. (609) 394-7222.MAXWELL'S Man or Astro-Man?; Enon. Tomorrow at 9 p.m. Tickets: $10. Kick Our the Jams DJ Series: Greg Tormo. Tuesday at 8 p.m. Free. Sleater-Kinney; the Gossip.  Wednesday at 9 p.m. Tickets: $9. Stereo Total; the Rondelles; Honeybunch. Thursday at 9 p.m. Tickets: $7. Luna. Friday and Saturday at 10 p.m. Tickets: $14. 1039 Washington Street, Hoboken. (201) 653-1703.McCARTER THEATER David Daniels, countertenor. Tomorrow at 8 p.m. Tickets: $28 and $25. 91 University Place, Princeton. (609) 258-2787.MINSTREL COFFEEHOUSE Greg Greenway and William Smith, folk singers. Friday at 8:30 p.m. Tickets: $5. Morris County Park Commission's Cultural Center, 300 Mendham Road, Morristown. (973) 335-9489.1860 HOUSE MONTGOMERY CULTURAL CENTER ''Golden Apples of the Sun,'' a musical anthology about the life of Charles Lindbergh. Today 3 p.m. and 7 p.m. 124 Montgomery Road, Skillman. (609) 631-9680.NEW JERSEY PERFORMING ARTS CENTER Mahler's ''Resurrection'' Symphony. Today at 3 p.m. Prudential Hall. Tickets: $15 to $58. 1 Center Street, Newark. (888) 466-5722.OCEAN GROVE SUMMER CONCERT SERIES Saturday through September 9. Monmouth Symphony Orchestra. Saturday at 7:30 p.m.  Tickets: $18; free for children. The Great Auditorium, two blocks from the ocean at the intersection of Pilgrim and Ocean Pathways, Ocean Grove. (732) 988-0645.PARAMOUNT THEATER Monmouth Symphony Orchestra, featuring clarinet and bassoon duet. Today at 2:30 p.m. Tickets: $18; $14 for older people; free for children. Reservations are suggested. Ocean Avenue, Asbury Park. (732) 918-6676.PNC BANK ARTS CENTER Styx, REO Speedwagon, Eddie Money. Next Sunday at 7 p.m.  Tickets: $17.50 to $45. Exit 116, off the Garden State Parkway, Holmdel. (201) 507-8900.PRINCETON UNIVERSITY RICHARDSON AUDITORIUM Greater Princeton Youth Orchestra, Fernando Raucci, music director. Today at 3 p.m. Tickets: $7. Alexander Hall, Princeton. (609) 258-5000.PRINCETON UNIVERSITY TAPLIN AUDITORIUM Mika Ikeda, pianist. Works of Bach, Copland and Schumann. Today at 3 p.m. Free. Friends of Music at Princeton student recital.  Tuesday at 8 p.m. Free. Taplin Auditorium, Fine Hall. Washington Road, Princeton. (609) 258-4239.RARITAN RIVER MUSIC FESTIVAL 2000 The Lark Quartet. Saturday at 7:30 p.m. Clinton Presbyterian Church, 91 Center Street (one block north of Main Street), Clinton. (908) 213-1100.RENAISSANCE CAFE ''Jazz Lovers Fridays,'' featuring Carrie Jackson and her all-star Jazzin Trio. Friday, 6 p.m. to 10 p.m. No cover. 195 Mulberry Street, at Lafayette Street, Newark. (973) 623-0002.ST. PAUL'S EPISCOPAL CHURCH Elements String Quartet. Tomorrow at 8 p.m. Plymouth State Chamber singers in concert. Thursday at 8 p.m. Donations requested. 414 East Broad Street, Westfield. (908) 232-8506.ST. PETER'S EPISCOPAL CHURCH ''One World, Many Voices,'' concert by the Arcadian Chorale. Today at 3:30 p.m. Tickets: $9; $8 for older people; $7 for students. 33 Throckmorton Street, Freehold. (732) 583-4007.ST. PETER'S EPISCOPAL CHURCH ''Welcome, Sweet Springtime: Birds, Trees, Flowers, Lovers'' concert featuring Ars Musica Antiqua, early music ensemble of instrumentalists and vocalists. Today at 3 p.m. Tickets:  $15; $12 for students and older people. 215 Boulevard, Mountain Lakes. (973) 334-4429.SCHOLA CANTORUM ON HUDSON ''An Afternoon With Bernstein.'' Today at 4 p.m. Tickets: $10; $6 for students and older people. St. Michael Church, 252 Ninth Street, Jersey City. (201) 798-6137.SPRINGFIELD PUBLIC LIBRARY Chinese American Music Ensemble. Today at 2 p.m.  Free by ticket only. Donald B. Palmer Museum, 66 Mountain Avenue, Springfield. (973) 376-4930.STANHOPE HOUSE Mardi Gras on Wheels, featuring Cairo and the VooDudes. Today, 4 p.m. to 9 p.m. Tickets: $10. The David Nelson Band.  Thursday at 9 p.m. Tickets: $12. Billy Hector, blues-rock. Friday at 10 p.m. Tickets: $6. A.L. James and Spare Change. Saturday at 10 p.m.  Tickets: $6. Blue Sparks, dance music. Next Sunday at 9 p.m. Tickets: $10. 45 Main Street, Stanhope. (973) 347-0458.STATE THEATER Ringo Starr and his All Star Band. Wednesday at 8 p.m. Tickets: $35 to $75. 15 Livingston Avenue, New Brunswick. (732) 246-7469.TEMPLE BETH EL OF NORTHERN VALLEY ''Generally Gershwin.'' Tomorrow at 7 p.m.  Tickets: $10, $12. 221 Schraalenburgh Road, Closter. (201) 768-5112.UNITARIAN CHURCH The Claring Chamber Players will present their final concert of the 1999-2000 season. Today at 3 p.m. Tickets:  $18; $15 for older people; $8 for students. 67 Church Street, Montclair. (973) 744-7654.WEST SIDE PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH RIDGEWOOD 11th Annual Community Hymn Festival. Today at 7:30 p.m. Freewill donation: $7. South Monroe Street and West Ridgewood Avenue. (201) 652-1966.WESTMINSTER CHOIR COLLEGE OF RIDER UNIVERSITY Ena Bronstein, pianist. Faculty Recitals. Today at 4 p.m. Tickets: $5. Randall Thompson at 100 Years and More, with the Youth Chorale Chamber Singers. Thursday at 8 p.m. Tickets: $5. Bristol Chapel, 101 Walnut Lane, Princeton. (609) 219-2001.TheaterALGONQUIN ARTS THEATER ''Light Up the Sky,'' Moss Hart's comedy. Today at 3 p.m. Tickets: $11 to $34. 171 Main Street, Manasquan. (732) 345-1400.AMERICAN STAGE COMPANY ''Ain't Misbehavin','' musical. Today at 2:30 p.m. and 7 p.m. Tickets: $20 to $30. Becton Hall, Fairleigh Dickinson University, 1000 River Road, Teaneck. (201) 692-7744.CENTENARY STAGE COMPANY Spring Festival of Shows, featuring ''Tom Sawyer.'' Today at 4:30 p.m.; Saturday at 2 p.m.; next Sunday at 7:30 p.m. ''Anything Goes.'' Today at 1 p.m.; Saturday at 8 p.m.; next Sunday at 1 p.m. ''West Side Story.'' Friday at 8 p.m.; Saturday at 5 p.m.; next Sunday at 7:30 p.m. Tickets: $8; $6 for children under 12. Centenary College, 400 Jefferson Street, Hackensack. (908) 979-0900.CHESTER THEATER GROUP ''Waiting for Godot.'' Through Saturday. Friday and Saturday at 8 p.m. Tickets: $15; $14 for students and older people. Black River Playhouse, Grove Street, Chester. (908) 879-7304.CIRCLE PLAYERS ''A View From the Bridge,'' by Arthur Miller. Through June 3. Fridays and Saturdays at 8:30 p.m.; matinee performance today at 2 p.m. Tickets: $12; today's matinee: $10. 416 Victoria Avenue, Piscataway. (732) 968-7555.ELIZABETH PLAYHOUSE ''Of Human Bondage,'' by Karon Semones. Through June 4. Fridays and Saturdays at 7:30 p.m.; Sundays at 2 p.m. Tickets: $8; $6 for students and older people; $5 on Fridays. 1100 East Jersey Street, Elizabeth. (908) 355-0077.ELMWOOD PLAYHOUSE ''Minnie's Boys,'' Marx Brothers musical. Through June 10. Fridays and Saturdays at 8:30 p.m.; today and June 4 at 2:30 p.m. Tickets: $17; $15 for students and older people. 10 Park Street, Nyack, N.Y. (914) 353-1313.GEORGE STREET PLAYHOUSE ''Ancestral Voices,'' by A. R. Gurney. Through next Sunday. Tuesday through Saturday at 8 p.m.; Saturday at 2 p.m.; next Sunday and 2 p.m. and 7 p.m. Tickets: $22 to $40. The Next Stage Festival. Through June 11. ''1001 Nights.'' Friday at 8 p.m.; Saturday at 7 p.m. Tickets: $10. 9 Livingston Avenue, New Brunswick. (732) 246-7717.HELEN HAYES PERFORMING ARTS CENTER ''Shirley Valentine,'' starring Loretta Swit.  Final performance today. Tickets: $21 to $36. 117 Main Street, Nyack, N.Y. (914) 358-6333.HILLCREST COMMUNITY CENTER ''A Bad Year for Tomatoes,'' performed by the West Milford Players. Today at 2 p.m. Tickets: $10; $8 for older people and students. ''Kaleidoscope,'' a collection of scenes and songs. Friday and Saturday at 8 p.m. Tickets: $5. 1810 Macopin Road, West Milford. (973) 728-0027.HUNTERDON HILLS PLAYHOUSE ''Mary, Mary,'' Jean Kerr's comedy. Through June 30. Monday through Saturday luncheon performances at 11 a.m., $35.50 and $39.50; Saturdays at 6:30 p.m., $43 and $47; Sundays at 3:30 p.m., $41.50 and $45.50. Reservations required.  Exit 12 off Routes 78 and 22, Perryville. (800) 447-7313.KELSEY THEATER ''2000 Footsteps!'' performed by the Mercer Dance Ensemble. Friday and Saturday at 8 p.m.; next Sunday at 3 p.m. Tickets: $9 to $18. Mercer County Community College, 1200 Trenton Road, Trenton. (609) 584-9444.LUNA STAGE ''Jaques Brel Is Alive and Well and Living in Paris,'' 1960's revue. Today at 2 p.m. Tickets: $22; $18 for students and older people. 7 Oak Place, Montclair. (973) 744-3309.McCARTER THEATER ''Night Governess,'' world premiere musical by Polly Penn. Today at 2 p.m. and 7:30 p.m.. Tickets: $27 to $39.  Center for the Performing Arts, 91 University Place, Princeton. (609) 258-2787.MONTCLAIR HIGH SCHOOL ''Stars Come Out for Kids,'' benefit featuring Savion Glover, tap-dancer. Today at 4 p.m. Tickets: $15 to $100. 100 Chestnut Street, Montclair. (973) 509-4500.MURDER TO GO THEATER ''Killing Mr. Withers.'' Ongoing. Fridays and Saturdays at 7:30 p.m. Tickets: $45 on Fridays; $48 on Saturdays, includes four-course dinner. Il Giardino, Cedar Knolls. (973) 301-0562.NEW JERSEY PERFORMING ARTS CENTER ''Dance Jam,'' featuring the American Youth Dance Company, Dance Innovations and Newark Arts High School Dance Ensemble. Today at 2 p.m. Tickets: $18; $9 for children. New Jersey Ballet performs ''For Ella,'' ''Western Sweet'' and other selections. Thursday at 7 p.m. Tickets: $20 to $40. ''Hispanic Youth Showcase.'' Friday at 7 p.m. Tickets: $12; $7 for children. Prudential Hall. 1 Center Street, Newark. (888) 466-5722.NEW JERSEY REPERTORY COMPANY ''Octet,'' Mark Dunn comic-drama. Friday through June 18. Thursdays through Saturdays at 8 p.m.; Sundays at 2 p.m. Tickets: $25.  Opening night on Friday with reception: $35.  Lumia Theater, 179 Broadway, Long Branch. (732) 229-3166.PAPER MILL PLAYHOUSE ''The Student Prince.'' Through Saturday. Wednesday and Friday at 8 p.m.; Thursday at 2 and 8 p.m.; Saturday at 2:30 and 8 p.m. Tickets: $36 to $60. Brookside Drive, Millburn. (973) 376-4343.PLAYWRIGHTS THEATER OF NEW JERSEY ''Radium Girls,'' by Dolores Whiskeyman. Through next Sunday. Thursday and Friday at 8 p.m.; Saturday at 2 p.m. and 8 p.m.; Sunday at 3 p.m.. Tickets: $18; $16. 33 Green Village Road, Madison. (973) 514-1787, ext. 30.PRINCETON UNIVERSITY RICHARDSON AUDITORIUM ''A Midsummer Night's Dream,'' performed by the Princeton University Orchestra, Michael Pratt, conductor, and the Princeton Shakespeare Company, Thomas P. Roche, director. Thursday and Friday at 8 p.m. Tickets: $5. Alexander Hall, Princeton. (609) 258-5000.STATE THEATER ''The Red Balloon'' performed by Scotland's theater company, Visible Fictions. Today at 1 p.m. and 4 p.m. Tickets: $12 and $14. 15 Livingston Avenue, New Brunswick. (732) 246-7469.STOCKTON PERFORMING ARTS CENTER ''Ellis Island,'' an American Family Theater production. Friday at 10:30 a.m. and noon. Tickets: $6. Jim Leeds Road, Pomona. (609) 652-4527.TRI-STATE ACTORS THEATER ''Collected Stories,'' a drama by Donald Margulies. Today at 3 p.m. Tickets: $13; $11 for students and older people. Garris Center Theater, Broad Street, Branchville. (888) 840-7889.WESTMINSTER CHOIR COLLEGE OF RIDER UNIVERSITY ''The Play's the Thing,'' based on Shakespeare's ''King Lear.'' Today at 4 p.m. Tickets: $5. The Playhouse, 101 Walnut Lane, Princeton. (609) 219-2001.Museums and GalleriesABC GALLERY ''Nature's Mysteries, Oils by Edith Skiba.'' Tomorrow through July 1. Opening reception: Thursday, 6 p.m. to 8 p.m.  Hours: Monday through Thursday, 1 to 9 p.m.; Friday, 1 to 5 p.m.; Saturday, 10 a.m. to 5 p.m. Lambertville Public Library, 6 Lilly Street, Lambertville. (609) 397-0275.AMERICAN LABOR MUSEUM ''Vital Vestiges,'' a photodocumentary of the Paterson historic district's ruins. ''What is Industrial Hygiene?'' photo and illustration exhibit on loan from the American Industrial Hygiene Association in Virginia. Through June 25. Hours: Wednesdays through Saturdays, 1 to 4 p.m.; other times by appointment. Botto House National Landmark, 83 Norwood Street, Haledon. (973) 595-7953.ART FORMS Paul Bennett Hirsch: One Person Show. Through Saturday. Hours: Tuesdays through Fridays, 10 a.m. to 6 p.m.; Saturdays, 10 a.m. to 5 p.m.; Sundays, 1 p.m. to 4 p.m. 16 Monmouth Street, Red Bank. (732) 530-4330.ARTWORKS GALLERY ''Representational Cross Section,'' Spring Invitational show. Through June 11. Hours: Tuesdays through Fridays, 11 a.m. to 4 p.m.; Sundays 1 to 4 p.m. 19 Everett Alley, Trenton. (609) 394-9436.ATRIUM ART GALLERY ''Five Views,'' featuring landscape photography. Through July 21.  Hours: Mondays through Fridays, 9 a.m. to 5 p.m. Morris County Administration and Records Building, Morristown. (973) 285-6120.BELSKIE MUSEUM OF ART AND SCIENCE Anna Fabris, paintings. Through May 31. Hours: Mondays and Wednesdays, noon to 9 p.m.; Tuesdays, Thursdays and Fridays, noon to 5 p.m. Closter Public Library, 280 High Street, Closter. (201) 768-0286.HIRAM BLAUVELT ART MUSEUM ''The Nature of Black and White,'' wildlife paintings, drawings and sculpture. Through June 11. Hours: Wednesdays through Fridays, 10 a.m. to 4 p.m.; Saturdays and Sundays, 2 to 5 p.m. 705 Kinderkamack Road, Oradell. (201) 261-0012.BRION GALLERIES ''New Work by Oil Painter Cathy Lang.'' Through June 25. Hours: Wednesdays and Thursdays, 10 a.m. to 5 p.m.; Fridays and Saturdays, 9 a.m. to 6 p.m.; Sundays, 11 a.m. to 6 p.m. 1293 Route 179, Lambertville. (609) 397-7030.CERULEAN FINE ARTS GALLERY ''The Art of the Portrait.'' Through June 10. Hours: Tuedays through Fridays, 11:30 a.m. to 6 p.m.; Saturdays, 4 to 9 p.m. Headquarters Plaza Mall, Speedwell Avenue (Route 202), Morristown. (973) 267-3730.EVERGREEN GALLERY ''Intimate Landscapes in oil,'' by Marie Salvato. Through June 3. Hours: Mondays through Saturdays, 10 a.m. to 5 p.m. 308 Morris Avenue, Spring Lake. (732) 449-4488.EXTENSION GALLERY Petro Hul's ''Recent Work.'' Through June 1. Hours: Mondays through Thursdays, 10 a.m. to 4 p.m.; other times by appointment. 60 Ward Avenue Extension, Mercerville. (609) 890-7777.FAIRLEIGH DICKINSON UNIVERSITY ''Inner and Outer Reality,'' mixed media exhibit, by Ruth Rintel. Through June 2. Hours: Mondays through Fridays, 9 a.m. to 9 p.m.; Saturdays, 9 a.m. to 2 p.m. Edward Williams Gallery, 150 Kotte Place, Hackensack. (201) 692-2449.GALLERY OF SOUTH ORANGE ''Death Died,'' mixed-media sculpture by Ela Sha; ''Portals,'' collages by Ellen Weisbord; and ''Art as a Purpose,'' mixed-media on paper and oil pastels by Lynn Foster. Through June 4 Hours: Wednesdays and Thursdays, 10 a.m. to 2 p.m. and 4 to 6 p.m.; Saturdays and Sundays, 1 to 4 p.m. Baird Center, 5 Mead Street, South Orange. (973) 378-7754.GROUNDS FOR SCULPTURE Salute to Roberta Peters, soprano, including performances by Helen Todd, soprano, and Richard Hobson, baritone. Today at 3 p.m. (609) 581-7200.  ''Spring Exhibition'' featuring Red Grooms: sculpture; Bill Barrett: sculpture and painting; and Andrzej Pitynski: partisans.  Through July 2. Hours: Thursdays through Saturdays, 10 a.m. to 4 p.m.; Tuesday and Wednesday by appointment. 18 Fairgrounds Road, Hamilton Township. (609) 586-0616.GUILD OF CREATIVE ART ''Garden Travels,'' watercolor paintings by Sally Brandenburg. Through June 1. Hours: daily, noon to 4:30 p.m. 620 Broad Street, Shrewsbury. (732) 741-1441.JOHN HARMS CENTER FOR THE ARTS ''Arborealis,'' photography by Cali Gorevic. Through Wednesday. Hours: Monday through Wednesday, 11 a.m. to 6 p.m. 30 North Van Brunt Street, Englewood. (201) 567-3600.HUNTERDON MUSEUM OF ART ''Robert Forman: 'Narratives in Thread' and 'Huichol Art in the Collection of Robert Forman.' ''  Through June 18. Hours: Tuesdays through Sundays, 11 a.m. to 5 p.m. 7 Lower Center Street, Clinton. (908) 735-8415.J.C.C. ON THE PALISADES ''Mysticism and Mosaics,'' an exhibit of lithographs, seriagraphs, prints and original mosaics by Michoel Muchnik, artist. Through May 30. Hours: Monday through Thursday, 9 a.m to 10 p.m.; Friday and Sunday, 9 a.m. to 5 p.m. 411 East Clinton Avenue, Tenafly. (201) 569-7900, extension 433.JERSEY CITY MUSEUM ''Joan Semmel: Recent Paintings.'' Through June 3. Hours: Tuesdays through Saturdays, 10:30 a.m. to 5 p.m.; Wednesdays, 10:30 a.m.to 8 p.m. 472 Jersey Avenue, Jersey City. (201) 547-4514.KERYGMA GALLERY ''Flowers: In the Still Life and Landscape,'' group show of gallery artists. Through Saturday. Hours: Tuesday through Saturday, 10 a.m. to 5 p.m.; today, 1 to 5 p.m. 38 Oak Street, Ridgewood. (201) 444-5510.LAUREL TRACEY GALLERY ''Childs Play,'' recent paintings by Dee Jenkins. Through June 10. Hours: Tuesdays through Saturdays, 10:30 a.m. to 5:30 p.m.; Sundays, 12:30 p.m. to 4:30 p.m. 10 White Street, Red Bank. (732) 224-0760.LAWRENCEVILLE SCHOOL John Register: A Retrospective. Through June 3. Hours: Mondays, Tuesdays, Thursdays and Fridays, 9 a.m. to noon and 1 to 4:30 p.m.; Wednesdays and Saturdays, 9 a.m. to noon. Gruss Center of Visual Arts, the Rotunda Gallery and the Marguerite and James Hutchins Gallery, Lawrenceville. (609) 620-6026.LIBERTY SCIENCE CENTER ''Lakota Wolf Preserve,'' photographs by Dan Bacon. Through June 18. Hours: Tuesdays through Sundays, 9:30 to 5:30 p.m. Environment Level, Liberty State Park, 251 Phillip Street, Jersey City. (201) 451-0006, extension 295.MACCULLOCH HALL HISTORICAL MUSEUM ''Woven Into Words: Coverlets in America.'' Through Aug. 13. Admission: $3; $2 for older people and students. Hours: Wednesdays, Thursdays and Sundays, 1 to 4 p.m. 45 Macculloch Avenue, Morristown. (973) 538-2404.MARSHA CHILD CONTEMPORARY ''Worlds on Paper,'' an exhibition of paintings, drawings, etchings, mezzotints, and more by artists from a dozen countries. Through Saturday. Hours: Tuesday through Saturday, 10 a.m. to 5:30 p.m.; other times by appointment. 220 Alexander Street, Princeton. (609) 497-7330.MIDDAY GALLERY ''Family, Friends and Favorite Places,'' exhibition of art works by Helen Frank. Through June 11. Hours: Tuesday through Saturday, 10 a.m. to 5 p.m. 8 North Dean Street, Englewood. (201) 568-4454.MONMOUTH COUNTY HISTORICAL ASSOCIATION ''Angels in the Household: Childhood Life in Monmouth County, 1700-1920.'' Through June 30. Hours: Tuesdays through Saturdays, 10 a.m. to 4 p.m.; Sundays, 1 to 4 p.m. Admission: $2; $1.50 for older people; $1 for those ages 6 to 18; free for children under 6. 70 Court Street, Freehold. (732) 462-1466.MONTCLAIR ART MUSEUM ''Untamed Spirits: Animal Imagery in Native American Art.'' Through July 30. Will Barnet: A Timeless World. Through August 20. Hours: Tuesdays, Wednesdays, Fridays and Saturdays, 11 a.m. to 5 p.m.; Thursdays and Sundays, 1 to 5 p.m. Admission: $5; $4 for older people and students; free for members and children under 12. 3 South Mountain Avenue, Montclair. (973) 746-5555.MORRIS MUSEUM ''Fresh Perspectives.'' Through June 5.''The Collected Century, 1900 to 2000.'' Through June 11. ''Ice Age,'' featuring casts of mammals from the Pleistocene epoch. Through June 18. Hours: Sundays, 1 to 5 p.m.; Tuesdays through Saturdays, 10 a.m. to 5 p.m.; Thursdays to 8 p.m. Admission: $5; $3 for older people and children under age 3. 6 Normandy Heights Road, Morristown. (973) 538-0454.MOSTLY GLASS ''A Spectrum of Glass Art.'' Through May 31. Hours: Mondays through Saturdays, 10 a.m. to 6 p.m. 3 East Palisade Avenue, Englewood. (201) 816-1222.MUSEUM OF THE AMERICAN HUNGARIAN FOUNDATION ''Munkacsy in America,'' paintings by Mihaly Munkacsy. Through June 18. Donation: $5. Hours: Tuesdays through Saturdays, 11 a.m. to 4 p.m.; Sundays, 1 to 4 p.m. 300 Somerset Street, New Brunswick. (732) 846-5777.NABISCO GALLERY ''Windows on My World,'' exhibit showcasing acrylic paintings, computer art and sculpture by students in the Arts Access program of the Matheny School and Hospital, Peapack. Tomorrow through June 21. Hours: daily, noon to 4 p.m. 100 DeForest Avenue, East Hanover. (973) 503-2000.NEW JERSEY CENTER FOR VISUAL ARTS  ''Forgotten Places,'' recent paintings and digital prints by Liz Demaree. Through June 9.  ''On the Horizon: Landscape at the Millennium.'' Through June 11. Hours: Mondays through Fridays, noon to 4 p.m.; Thursdays, 7 to 9 p.m.; Saturdays and Sundays, 2 to 4 p.m. Palmer Gallery, 68 Elm Street, Summit. (908) 273-9121.NEW JERSEY CITY UNIVERSITY ''Spirituality in the Landscape,'' an exhibit of paintings by Patti Barham Campbell. Through June 2. Hours: Mondays through Fridays, 11 a.m. to 4 p.m.; other times by appointment. Lemmerman Gallery, Hepburn Hall, Room 323; 2039 Kennedy Boulevard, Jersey City. (201) 200-3246.NEW JERSEY HISTORICAL SOCIETY ''History's Mysteries,'' interactive exhibition. Through June. ''Dining In, Dining Out,'' featuring photographs, video clips, rare silverware, period furniture and 18th-century cookbooks. Through summer, 2001. ''Pride of Newark: Baseball's Bears and Eagles,'' about the history of baseball in Newark. Through Summer 2001. Hours: Tuesdays through Saturdays, 10 a.m. to 5 p.m. 52 Park Place, Newark. (973) 596-8500.NEW JERSEY STATE MUSEUM ''Forgotten Gateway: The Abandoned Building of Ellis Island,'' photographs by Larry Racioppo.  Through June 30. ''Nikon's Small World, 1999-2000.'' Through Tuesday. ''Building a Collection: Fine Art at the New Jersey State Museum.'' Saturday through August 20. Call for tickets: (800) 766-6048. Hours: Tuesdays through Saturdays, 9 a.m. to 4:45 p.m.; Sundays, noon to 5 p.m. Free. 205 West State Street, Trenton. (609) 292-6464.NEWARK MUSEUM ''The Art of Ink in American 2000: International Contemporary Calligraphy.'' Through July 9. ''Year of the Dragon:  The Calligraphy of Wang Fangyu.'' Through November 12. ''From Tabletop to TV Tray: China and Glass in America, 1880-1980.'' Through June 18. ''Needless Necessity: Jewelry, Silver and Personal Meaning.'' Through December. Hours: Wednesdays through Sundays, noon to 5 p.m.; Thursdays (after hours) until 8:30 p.m. 49 Washington Street, Newark. (973) 596-6550.NOYES MUSEUM OF ART Inspired by Nature series, featuring ''Recreating Flowers: The Glass Wonders of Paul J. Stankard.'' Through Sept. 3 ''Capturing the Jersey Shore: Works of Anthony J. Rudisill.'' Through Sept. 10. ''Craft Concepts 2000: Treasures of Tomorrow.'' Friday through June 4; special preview on Thursday, from 6:30 p.m. to 9:30 p.m. Hours: Wednesdays through Sundays, 11 a.m. to 4 p.m. Admission: $3; $2 for older people and students. Lily Lake Road, Oceanville. (609) 652-8848.OCEAN COUNTY HISTORICAL SOCIETY ''Ocean County From the Explorers to 1950,'' featuring photographs, documents, paintings and objects illustrating the county's history. Through Oct. 31. Hours: Tuesdays and Thursdays, 1 to 3 p.m.; Saturdays, 10 a.m. to 4 p.m. 26 Hadley Avenue, Toms River. (732) 341-1880.PASSAIC COUNTY COMMUNITY COLLEGE Jessica Fromm: Recent Work. Through June 22. Hours: Mondays through Fridays, 9 a.m. to 9 p.m.; Saturdays, 9 a.m. to 5 p.m. Broadway and LRC Galleries, Broadway and Memorial Drive, Paterson. (973) 684-5448.WILLIAM PATERSON UNIVERSITY Three Generations of Hobart Family Photographers.  Through June 4. Hours: Mondays through Fridays, 10 a.m. to 5 p.m. Hobart Manor, 300 Pompton Road, Wayne. (973) 720-2825.PETERS VALLEY CRAFT EDUCATION CENTER ''Art in the Open: The Peters Valley Gallery Without Walls.'' Through June 30. Group exhibition. 19 Kuhn Road, Layton. (973) 948-5200.PLAINSBORO PUBLIC LIBRARY GALLERY May Madness Invitational Salon Show.  Through June 4. Hours: Mondays and Fridays, at 9 a.m. to 5:30 p.m.; Tuesdays through Thursdays, 9 a.m. to 8:30 p.m.; Saturdays, 10 a.m. to 5 p.m.; Sundays, 1 p.m. to 5 p.m. 641 Plainsboro Road, Plainsboro. (609) 275-2897.PRINCETON UNIVERSITY ART MUSEUM ''Curator's Choice: Recent Acquisitions.'' Through June 6. Photographs by Barbara Bosworth. Through June 18. ''A Window Into Collecting American Folk Art: The Edward Duff Balken Collection.'' Through June 18.  ''Flora and Fauna in Chinese Painting.'' Through July 30. Yayoi Kusama: Early Drawings From the Collection of Richard Castellane. Through July 30. Hours: Tuesdays through Saturdays, 10 a.m. to 5 p.m.; Sundays, 1 to 5 p.m. Princeton campus. (609) 258-3788.PUFFIN CULTURAL FORUM ''Terra Infirma:  Art, Activisim and the Environment.'' Through June 24. Opening reception: today, 2 p.m. Hours: Wednesday through Saturday, 1 to 5 p.m.; or by appointment. 20 East Oakdene Avenue, Teaneck. (201) 836-8923.RIVERRUN GALLERY Abstraction 2000.  Through June 10. Hours: Sundays, noon to 5 p.m.; Mondays and Wednesdays through Saturdays, 10 a.m. 5 p.m. 287 South Main Street (Route 29), Lambertville. (609) 397-3349.RUTGERS UNIVERSITY - CAMDEN ''New Artists 2000,'' including paintings, sculptures, graphic designs and more by 26 seniors.  Through Saturday. Hours: Monday through Saturday, 10 a.m. to 4 p.m.; Thursday until 8 p.m. Stedman Gallery, Third Street between Cooper Street and Benjamin Franklin Bridge, Camden. (856) 225-6350.SCHERING-PLOUGH CORPORATION ''At the Shore with Dick LaBonte'' exhibition.  Through June 30. Hours: Monday through Friday, 10 a.m. to 4 p.m. Gallery, 1 Giralda Farms, Madison. (973) 822-7000.SIMON GALLERY Anne Raymond and Alice Zinnes, paintings. Tuesday through June 24. Opening reception: Thursday, 6 p.m.to 8 p.m.  Hours: Tuesdays through Fridays, noon to 6 p.m.; Saturdays, noon to 5 p.m.; other times by appointment. 48 Bank Street, Morristown. (973) 538-5456.SKULSKI ART GALLERY Maria Fuks, paintings. Through June 16. Hours: Tuesdays through Fridays, 5 to 9 p.m.; Saturdays, 10 a.m. to 3 p.m. Polish Cultural Foundation, 177 Broadway, Clark. (732) 382-7197.SPRINGFIELD PUBLIC LIBRARY ''Paper Poetry.'' Through June 1. Hours: Mondays, Wednesdays and Thursdays, 10 a.m. to 8:30 p.m.; Tuesdays, Fridays and Saturdays, 10 a.m. to 4:30 p.m.; Sundays, 1 p.m. to 3:30 p.m. Donald B. Palmer Museum, 66 Mountain Avenue, Springfield. (973) 376-4930.SUMEI MULTIDISCIPLINARY ARTS CENTER Sumei National Juried Print Exhibit 2000, dedicated to the memory of Belkis Ayon, a Cuban printmaker. Through June 1. Hours: Wednesdays, 1 p.m. to 6 p.m.; Saturdays and Sundays, 11 a.m. to 6 p.m.; or call for appointment. 19 Liberty Street, at the corner of Lafayette Street, Newark. (973) 643-7883.TOWNSHIP GALLERY Kathleen Havens, paintings. Through July 7. Hours: Mondays through Fridays, 9 a.m. to 4 p.m. Opening reception: today, 4:30 p.m. to 7 p.m. Free. Chatham Township Municipal Building, 58 Meyersville Road, Chatham. (973) 635-2482.TOWNSHIP OF LEBANON MUSEUM OF NEW HAMPTON ''Landscapes and Seascapes,'' featuring landscapes of Hunterdon and Warren Counties by Madeline Taranto, artist.  Through May 30. Hours: Tuesdays and Thursdays, 9:30 a.m. to 5 p.m.; Saturdays, 1 p.m. to 5 p.m. (908) 537-6464.TRENTON CITY MUSEUM ''Guccione, the Painter: A Retrospective of His Life's Work.'' Through June 11. Hours: Tuesdays through Saturdays, 11 a.m. to 3 p.m.; Sundays, 2 to 4 p.m. Ellarslie, Cadwalader Park, Trenton. (609) 989-3632.WHEATON VILLAGE ''American Glass: 1900-2000,'' featuring more than 100 industrial and decorative pieces. Through Oct. 22. ''2000 Flowers.'' Saturday through June 11. Hours: Wednesdays through Sundays, 10 a.m. to 5 p.m. Admission: $7; $6 for older people; $3.50 for students. Exit 26, Route 55, Millville. (800) 998-4552, extension 2756.WYCKOFF GALLERY ''Spring Traditions.'' Through May 31. Hours: Tuesdays through Saturdays, 11:30 a.m. to 4:30 p.m. 648 Wyckoff Avenue, Wyckoff. (201) 891-7436.YOGI BERRA MUSEUM ''Glove Story,'' interactive exhibit on the evolution of the baseball glove, including 19th century rare vintage models and hands-on replicas. Through June 26. Artifacts from the life of the baseball player and exhibits on the history of the Yankees, baseball in New Jersey, Negro Leagues, evolution of equipment, and baseball during World War II. Ongoing. Hours: Wednesdays through Sundays, noon to 5 p.m. Tickets: $4; $2 for children. Montclair State University, 8 Quarry Road, Little Falls. (973) 655-2377.For ChildrenBARNES AND NOBLE Children's Storytime and Tea Party. Tuesday and Wednesday at 10 a.m. Pre-registration is required. Free. 160 Route 17 North, Paramus. (201) 261-6995.BERGEN COUNTY Y JEWISH COMMUNITY CENTER Rich Snedaker's Sport-Specific Conditioning Clinic. Today, 11 a.m. to noon. For kids in grades 3 through 12. Fee: $5 for non-members. Super Club for kids in grades two through four. Tuesday, 6:15 p.m. to 7:45 p.m.  Fee: $12 for members; $18 for non-members.  Registration is required. 605 Pascack Road, Washington Township. (201) 666-6610, extension 210.FORUM THEATER COMPANY ''Narnia; the Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe,'' based on the ''Chronicles of Narnia'' by C. S. Lewis. Through June 10. Saturdays at 11 a.m. Tickets: $9. 314 Main Street, Metuchen. (732) 548-0582.JOHN HARMS CENTER FOR THE ARTS ''Ramona Quimby'' performed by Theatreworks/ USA. Today at noon and 3 p.m. Tickets: $12. 30 North Van Brunt Street, Englewood. (201) 567-3600.HUNTERDON MUSEUM OF ART ''Spring Fever,'' workshops and classes for children and adults, including KinderArt, Cartooning Around, Collage Kids and more. Through June 8. Hours: Tuesdays through Sundays, 11 a.m. to 5 p.m. 7 Lower Center Street, Clinton. (908) 735-8415.MORRIS COUNTY PARK COMMISSION Preschooler/Parent nature walks. ''Bats,'' today at 2 p.m. Fee: $5.Hours: daily, 9 a.m. to 4:30 p.m. Great Swamp Outdoor Education Center, 247 Southern Boulevard, Chatham Township. (973) 635-6629.NEWARK MUSEUM ''Where in the Universe Is Carmen Sandiego?'' at the Alice and Leonard Dreyfuss Planetarium. Through October. Saturdays and Sundays, 1 p.m. and 3 p.m. Tickets: $3; $2 for members; $1 for children and older people. 49 Washington Street, Newark. (973) 596-6355.NEW JERSEY CHILDREN'S MUSEUM ''Space Weekend.'' Today, 9 a.m. to 5 p.m. Daily programs: ''Fairy Tale Play'' at 10:30 a.m.; ''Storytime'' at noon; ''Special Craft Project'' at 2:30 p.m. Permanent exhibits: child-sized grocery store, pizzeria and castle, prehistoric cave, computers and more. Tickets: $8. 599 Industrial Avenue, Paramus. (201) 262-5151.NEW JERSEY STATE MUSEUM ''Laser Millennium 3-D,'' planetarium laser light show. Saturdays and Sundays at 1 and 3 p.m. Through June 25. Tickets: $6 includes 3-D glasses. 205 West State Street, Trenton. (609) 292-6464.PAPER MILL PLAYHOUSE ''Peter and the Wolf,'' performed by the Pushcart Players. Today at 10 a.m. Tickets: $8 and $9. Brookside Drive, Millburn. (973) 376-4343.RITZ THEATER ''The Fantasticks,'' musical. Through Saturday. Today at 2 p.m.; Wednesday at 7:30 p.m.; Friday and Saturday at 8 p.m. Tickets: $12.50 to $16. 915 White Horse Pike, Oaklyn. (856) 858-5230.STUDIO PLAYERS Magic Trunk Children's Theater presents ''Who's Afraid of the Big Bad Wolf.'' Today at 1:30 p.m. and 3:30 p.m.  Tickets: $6. 14 Alvin Place, Montclair. (973) 744-9752.Spoken WordBARNES & NOBLE Jerome L. Cohen, author, will discuss and sign his book ''The Gravestone Accord.'' Friday at 7:30 p.m. Free. 1180 Raritan Road, Clark. (732) 574-1818.BOOKENDS BOOKSTORE John Sandford will discuss and sign his book, ''Easy Prey.'' Today at 1 p.m. Anne Edwards will discuss and sign her book, ''Ever After: Diana and the Life She Led.'' Wednesday at 7 p.m. Yogi Berra will discuss and sign his book ''The Yogi Book: I Really Didn't Say Everything I Said.'' Thursday at 7 p.m. 232 East Ridgewood Avenue, Ridgewood. (201) 445-0726.BORDERS BOOKS AND MUSIC Bruce D. Schneider, Ph.D., will discuss and sign his book, ''Relax, You're Already Perfect: 10 Spiritual Lessons . . . to Remember.'' Wednesday at 7:30 p.m. 515 Route 73 South, Unit 1, Marlton. (609) 985-5080.EAST BRUNSWICK LIBRARY Laurie Lico Albanese will discuss her book, ''Lynelle by the Sea.'' Tomorrow at 8 p.m. Free. 2 Jean Walling Civic Center Drive, East Brunswick. (732) 390-6950.ENGLEWOOD PUBLIC LIBRARY The Bergen Poets. Wednesday at 8 p.m. Susan Dworkin, writer, editor and producer will do readings from Edna Ferber's ''Fanny Herself.''  Wednesday at 8 p.m. Free. 31 Engle Street, Englewood. (201) 568-2215.WESTIN HOTEL Joy Loverde, author of ''The Complete Eldercare Planner: Where to Start, Questions to Ask, How to Find Help,'' will discuss her insights with families in a seminar sponsored by Arden Courts Alzheimer's Assisted Living. Thursday, 7 p.m. to 9 p.m. Free.  2 Whippany Road, Morristown. (973) 581-1800.Etc.FLAT ROCK BROOK NATURE CENTER Nature Day Spring Festival. Today, 11 a.m. to 4 p.m.  Fee: $3; $1 for children. ''Spring Strolls,'' guided mile walk. Wednesday, 10 to 11 a.m. Fee: $3. Pre-registration required. ''Sunset Hiking Series.'' Tuesdays through May 30, 6:30 p.m. Fee: $3. 443 Van Nostrand Avenue, Englewood. (201) 567-1265.FREEHOLD ANTIQUEFEST The Freehold Center Partnership's Spring AntiqueFest. Today, 10 a.m. to 5 p.m. Vendors will line West Main Street between Court and Throckmorton Streets. (732) 946-2711.GIANT MODEL AIR SHOW Annual Giant Scale Model Airplane ''Fly-in.'' Saturday and next Sunday, beginning at 9 a.m. Warren Kruse field in the Assunpink Wildlife Management Area, near Imlaystown. Free. (609) 409-7530.HUNTERDON HISTORICAL MUSEUM ''Irish Day by the River,'' a celebration of Irish heritage, culture and music. Today, 11 a.m. to 6 p.m. Tickets: $6; free for children under 12.  Red Mill and Mulligan Quarry (from Routes 78, 31 and 22), Clinton. (908) 735-4101.JURIED AMERICAN INDIAN ARTS FESTIVAL 150 fine American Indian artists and entertainers, representing 50 tribes. Saturday, next Sunday and May 29, 11 a.m. to 6 p.m. Sponsored by the Powhatan Renape Nation. Admission: $10; $5 for children, 6 to 12, and older people; free for children under six. (609) 261-4747.MONTCLAIR STATE UNIVERSITY ArtsFest 2000, featuring Brazil 500 painting exhibition. Tomorrow through July 21. Art Gallery, Life Hall. Valley Road and Normal Avenue, Upper Montclair. (973) 655-4452.MORRIS COUNTY PARKS Night Walk. Saturday at 8 p.m. Free. Great Swamp Outdoor Education Center, 247 Southern Boulevard, Chatham. (973) 635-6629.SOMERSET COUNTY PARK COMMISSION 20th Annual Carving and Wildlife Art Show and Sale. Today, 10 a.m. to 5 p.m. Free. 190 Lord Stirling Road, Basking Ridge. (908) 766-2489. ''Woodland Walks at Leonard J. Buck Garden,'' guided tour. Today at 2 p.m. Admission: $3; $2 for students and older people. Visitor Center, 11 Layton Road, Far Hills. (908) 234-2677.TRAILSIDE NATURE AND SCIENCE CENTER The Union County Master Gardeners' annual Spring Garden Fair and Plant Sale. Today, noon to 5 p.m. Free. ''Become a Lunatic,'' planetarium show. Today at 2 p.m. ''Stellar Spring Skies,'' planetarium show. Today at 3:30 p.m. Admission: $3; $2.55 for older people. ''Frogs by Flashlight.'' Wednesday, 7 p.m. to 8 p.m. Fee: $5; pre-registration required. 452 New Providence Road, Mountainside. (908) 789-3670.VERONA PARK Fine Art and Crafts Show. Today, 10 a.m. to 5 p.m. Corner of Pleasant Valley Way and Bloomfield Avenue, Verona. (908) 874-5247.At the CasinosAll tickets are available through Ticketmaster, (800) 736-1420.BALLY'S PARK PLACE ''Legends in Concert,'' impersonations of Stevie Wonder, Little Richard, Elvis Presley, Linda Ronstadt and Barbara Streisand. Mondays through Thursdays at 3:30 and 7:30 p.m.; Saturdays at 8 and 10:30 p.m.; Sundays at 7:30 and 10 p.m. Tickets: $15 to $25. Park Cabaret, Boardwalk and Park Place. (800) 225-5977.CLARIDGE HOTEL ''Dream, Dream, Dream,'' featuring songs by the Everly Brothers. Through June 17. Monday through Thursday at 8 p.m.; Saturday at 7:30 p.m. and 10 p.m.; Sunday at 7 p.m. Tickets: $15, Sunday through Thursday; $19, Saturday. Palace Theater, Boardwalk and Park Place. (609) 340-3700.RESORTS CASINO HOTEL Tracy Lawrence with guests, Redmon and Vale. Friday at 10 p.m. Tickets: $25 and $35. The Theater, 1133 Boardwalk. (888) 771-1786.TROPICANA Legends of the Catskills with Freddy Roman and Dick Capri, with special guest Jack Carter. Today at 7 p.m. Tickets:  $20 to $30. ''Latin Fever.'' Through June 17. Mondays, Tuesdays and Thursdays at 8 p.m.; Wednesdays at 3:30 and 7:30 p.m.; Fridays at 9 p.m.; Saturdays at 8 and 11:30 p.m.; Sundays at 7 p.m. Tickets: $9.90. Boardwalk and Brighton Avenue. (609) 340-4020.TRUMP MARINA Big Bad Voodoo Daddy. Friday at 10 p.m.; Saturday at 9 p.m. Tickets:  $26.50. Grand Cayman. Little Feat. Next Sunday at 9 p.m. Tickets: $35. The Shell. Huron Avenue and Brigantine Boulevard. (800) 777-8477.ON THE TOWNS
CAROLINA GARCIA, petite and imposing, stood in front of the auditorium at Public School 146 in East Harlem. Ms. Garcia, a dancer in the Urban Bush Women troupe, was full of questions for the wiggling third graders: What is culture? What is a gesture? What is your name? What is your favorite color?It was a sunny Monday. Ms. Garcia's high-energy shenanigans (she sang, she danced) were a good way to start the school week for Julie Rosenthal's class. In this patch of Manhattan, it is a big deal to go to the theater, a museum or the ballet. Dancing is something people do on MTV. The beautiful and graceful Ms. Garcia, dressed in black, brought it on home, looking and talking like a homegirl who is also a citizen of the world.CAROLINA GARCIA, petite and imposing, stood in front of the auditorium at Public School 146 in East Harlem. Ms. Garcia, a dancer in the Urban Bush Women troupe, was full of questions for the wiggling third graders: What is culture? What is a gesture? What is your name? What is your favorite color?It was a sunny Monday. Ms. Garcia's high-energy shenanigans (she sang, she danced) were a good way to start the school week for Julie Rosenthal's class. In this patch of Manhattan, it is a big deal to go to the theater, a museum or the ballet. Dancing is something people do on MTV. The beautiful and graceful Ms. Garcia, dressed in black, brought it on home, looking and talking like a homegirl who is also a citizen of the world.She did a few dance movements, and some of the students said it reminded them of ''nasty'' dancing on television.''All over the world there are people who use their whole bodies in different ways, that represent nature or fertility and many other things,'' said Ms. Garcia, who is Cuban-American. ''You have to think many ways. You can't let television make you think one way.''The silence and wide-eyed looks meant Ms. Garcia was getting through. The students had questions, too. Was she limber? Did people recognize her when she walked down the street? And where do they dance, these Urban Bush Women?Taking it all in along with the students was Laura Silver, the principal. Ms. Silver said parents in this struggling community had the same hopes for their children as anyone else, but the idea of exposing them to the kind of dance, art and music found in grandiose buildings in mostly rich, white neighborhoods was intimidating.Many of the students enrolled in arts programs in the school have to be taught how to sit still and how to listen. They can find it amazing to settle into plush chairs in fancy rooms.''They only know movies,'' Ms. Silver said. ''And not good movies. And maybe video games.''Consider, she said, how scary it is for many students to go a place like the Metropolitan Museum of Art. Most families from the school do not even realize that the $10 admission fee is voluntary, not required.P.S. 146, which is at 106th Street and First Avenue, serves many one-parent families and children eligible for free lunches. Most are black and Latin, and some do not speak English as their first language.The school, to its credit, is clean and cheerful. It is also surprisingly quiet, given its population of 700 students. Some wore the school uniforms of yellow shirts and navy blue skirts or pants; others chose not to.So there they were with Ms. Garcia, learning that culture does not come with a price tag and that dance is something that can be composed from bits and pieces of ordinary life.The muscle that New York flexes well is the one that forms partnerships. And, not surprisingly, in this city so rich in the arts,  there are programs to bring people like Ms. Garcia into schools. She was at P.S. 146 the other day as part of a program at the 92nd Street Y called the Dance Introduction series.The 92nd St Y, on Lexington Avenue, is something of a neighbor to the school in terms of physical proximity, but probably part of another world entirely to most people in the community. The series presents professional dance companies in special school residences and performances at the Y. The program also provides classroom instruction for the students and professional development workshops for the teachers, crowned by professional dance performances.''It's a great support,'' Ms. Silver said. ''Not only is it good exposure, but for the children who go on to take dance or music lessons, it's a great way to build up self-esteem if maybe they're not doing well in another way.''Two performances were recently arranged so the students could see the Urban Bush Women at the Y. One was last Thursday, the other will be tomorrow.Meanwhile, Ms. Garcia told the students that ''culture is religion, it's food, it's music.''The students went up on stage. To deal with the momentary bursts of restlessness, Ms. Garcia told the students that she could turn any little gesture into a dance. Yes. Anything. The way they shook their heads. The way they sucked their thumbs. Their laughter. Their shuffling feet.Then all the people on the crowded stage closed their eyes. Ms. Garcia had them pretend they were wrapped inside a bubble. She had the children tell their name and their favorite color and accompany that information with a gesture.''You are free to express yourself inside your skin,'' Ms. Garcia said. She told them to say ''individuality.'' They said it over and over again.''I want you to close your eyes without being asleep and listen to yourself dream,'' she said.And that, of course, was the whole point.COPING
MORE hosts and hostesses are savoring summer by hiring others, ''reinforcements,'' as one hostess euphemistically called her caterer, to handle their outings and entertaining.If you arrive early for a South Shore Music concert at the Saugatuck Congregational Church in Westport, as I did recently, you will find people sitting in the church garden eating picnics supplied by Garelick & Herbs. A $16 picnic will contain a choice of garlic-herb marinated chicken breast, poached salmon or portobello mushroom with spinach and feta cheese. The accompaniments, all in separate containers, are a mixed baby green salad with balsamic dressing on the side, wild rice with cranberries, an asparagus medley, a Kaiser roll, a lemon bar, a small bottle of water, plastic utensils and large paper napkin.MORE hosts and hostesses are savoring summer by hiring others, ''reinforcements,'' as one hostess euphemistically called her caterer, to handle their outings and entertaining.If you arrive early for a South Shore Music concert at the Saugatuck Congregational Church in Westport, as I did recently, you will find people sitting in the church garden eating picnics supplied by Garelick & Herbs. A $16 picnic will contain a choice of garlic-herb marinated chicken breast, poached salmon or portobello mushroom with spinach and feta cheese. The accompaniments, all in separate containers, are a mixed baby green salad with balsamic dressing on the side, wild rice with cranberries, an asparagus medley, a Kaiser roll, a lemon bar, a small bottle of water, plastic utensils and large paper napkin.A sharp-eyed attendee of many summer events will observe picnic suppers opened from a variety of snappy caterers' boxes, whether it be the Fourth of July fireworks display at Waveny Park or outdoor concerts in the St. Mark's Episcopal Church courtyard in New Canaan, Shakespeare on the Sound, a Bay Queen cruise around the lighthouse in Norwalk Harbor or at the Cabaret Theater in Bridgeport. Russell's Creative Global Cuisine in West Hartford has done boxed dinners for a bus excursion to Foxwoods Casino for the Lincoln Financial Group of Hartford.''We got boxes with sturdy cut-plastic domed covers that could be inverted and used as plates,'' said Russell Pryzbek, who owns the business. ''The menu for 22 people included chicken Napoleon, layered with grilled eggplant, served on red lentils and Israeli couscous; sesame green beans with honey noodles; cashews with julienne snow peas; and sky-high scallion biscuits. Dessert was boxed separately: white chocolate pear truffles, pecan diamonds, biscotti, and chocolate-dipped strawberries.''Mr. Pryzbek, who has been a caterer for 20 years, has observed how tastes have changed, much to his delight. ''It used to be like trying to move a large ship with a tugboat,'' he said. ''Nowadays, clients are much more willing to try new things, presentation is more important, and there are so many more interesting foods to choose from.''Caterers' lists now resemble long menus in creative, stylish restaurants. The options are staggering, with the potential for turning an ordinary lawn party into a Julia Child-type gala celebration.Butternut strudel, ancho-crusted tenderloin, caper-crusted monkfish fillet, tamarind-glazed quail on a bed of Asian greens, coconut mahi-mahi with passion fruit sauce, skewered pork with cashew sate, grilled swordfish with papaya basil salsa, yucca fritters, artichoke gratin, corn-serrano chili muffins, baked bananas and macadamia nuts in phyllo pastry are just a few of the choices available from some of Connecticut's master caterers.Prices are pegged to the complexity of the menu, number of guests and level of service. A buffet dinner for 50 people might cost $20 to $75 (or up) a person. There may be extra charges for workers and beverages, and for rentals like chairs, tables, china, silver and centerpieces.What's in it for the client? A caterer allows the host to join the party. Jens Risom of New Canaan said, ''Unless you use a caterer, and in our case it is usually Best Wurst, you don't have any time with your guests.'' His wife, Henrietta Risom, agreed. ''Almost everything you cook, except a stew, needs last-minute attention,'' she said. ''Because of all the last-minute details, having a caterer counts a lot with me. I get the pleasure of actually being able to talk with my guests.''Julie Holloway of Darien said: ''We use a caterer, the Good Food Store, when we have large dinner parties, school functions or benefits, because it makes entertaining groups of 50 or 60 so much easier. I even used Good Food when I gave a dinner party recently for friends going to live in London and we had just 20 guests.''Debra Ponzak, owner of Aux Delices in Riverside, said parties with a specific cuisine -- Mexican, Caribbean, Thai -- have become especially popular in summer. ''People like the idea of a fiesta,'' she said. ''We have Mexican serapes to hang for a Mexican theme, cushions to place around for a Moroccan party.'' Like many full-service caterers, Aux Delices can supply everything: food, workers, linens, decorations, even music.Incredible Edibles, a Stamford caterer, does Hawaiian luaus in summer, even decking its servers in appropriate costumes. ''We feature suckling pig,'' said the chef, Ann Rossi, ''though usually we do a chicken dish as well, for people who don't like the sight of the pig.''Like most caterers in Fairfield County, Ms. Rossi likes to do fanciful hors d'oeuvres. ''People want something they haven't seen at someone else's party. We've done Vietnamese-style shrimp on sugar cane with a red chili dipping sauce, jiggers of gazpacho served with demitasse spoons, green apple and smoked duck tart and little zucchini pancakes with creme fraiche. Sometimes we use little hibachis with sate skewers. When you think summer, you think fun.''To Susan Goodman of Susan Goodman Catering in New Canaan, hors d'oeuvres offer endless fun and variety. Her menu lists more than 50 choices, including a basket of seasonal garden crudites with dips; Jamaican beef patties; skewered tortellini with red pepper and pesto dip; Indian samosas with peach chutney; and salmon mousse on endive spears.Chris Bracken, owner of Culinary Concerts in Madison, likes to make  an elaborate shellfish bar, raw and cooked, for a summer party. ''I use nets, old granite pails, lobster traps and old bricks, sometimes even arrange a 12-inch white trellis in a pot of geraniums, to create a rustic, homespun backdrop,'' he said. He then cooks one or two types of clams, citrus-grilled shrimp and crab cakes in an old iron skillet, and also serves raw shucked oysters and clams.Texas-style barbecues as well as clam and lobster bakes are also summer favorites. ''Usually people want parties like these for a sizable crowd,'' said Catherine Stebinger, owner of the Good Food Store in Darien. ''For a clam or lobster bake, we dig a pit, with seaweed and stones, and for a barbecue we rent a six-foot-long barbecue with a rotisserie spit on it for the suckling pig.''Culinary Concerts of Madison has been catering the Connecticut Arts Gala in the parking lot of the Bushnell in Hartford for six years, with sit-down dinners for 450 or so guests, but Mr. Bracken said he enjoyed small events, too.Susan Raible, events coordinator for Culinary Concerts, said that in summer, ''We use more citrus marinades, and focus on color and textures on platters to be visually inviting.'' On Culinary Concerts' agenda for July is a three-day family reunion at the shore, with 80 adults and 30 children.''There will be a series of lunches and a big Stars and Stripes barbecue,'' Ms. Raible said, ''and we'll do watermelon margaritas and a lot of homemade nonalcoholic drinks for the kids.''Weddings are the biggest catered events during summer, but birthdays, anniversaries, bar mitzvahs and children's parties are also popular. ''Kids' parties can be difficult,'' said Deborah Fisher, owner of Best Wurst in New Canaan, ''because of all the animals around. Ponies are O.K., but it isn't so easy working around live snakes and iguanas, which we have done.''Boat picnics have become highly popular. ''People going out on their boats love to take along pre-fixed items,'' said Ms. Ponzak of Aux Delices, ''but, unlike lawn parties, they want the food to be easy, nothing with stuff on top that's hard to eat.''The basic rule for portable food seems to be to avoid fussy things. Select easy-to-eat finger or fork foods that won't spill or make a mess. Soft-shell crabs, pre-fixed meats, poached fish, anything that can be served at room temperature.''Corporations are involved, too. Best Wurst provides food and staff for many company outings, such as one for Muehlstein International in which the employees played softball on the baseball diamond at Calf Pasture Beach in East Norwalk. ''Then we gave the executives chef's hats,'' Ms. Fisher said, ''and they loved grilling the bratwurst, chicken breasts and vegetables themselves, while our staff prepared and served the rest of the meal.''''It may be surprising, considering the hot weather, but what people tend to want in summer is grilling,'' Ms. Goodman said. Last summer she catered a carnival for a direct marketing company, M.B.I., in its Norwalk parking lot. ''There were 1,500 people,'' she said, ''and we had circus performers, games, hot dog carts, and we grilled ribs and corn on seven grills. It was fabulous.'' Ms. Goodman prepares and cooks everything at the site. ''Of course it demands careful advance organizing, but it guarantees that everything is extremely fresh.''
ERIC ALICEA was admiring photographs of his award-winning Damascene pigeons when a flutter of feathers sliced the air, accelerated past the sales counter and smacked loudly into the plate glass window. A huge white King Homer pigeon had leaped from its perch inside the Maspeth Bird Store in a vain attempt to launch itself over the flat garage roofs of Flushing Avenue. Pounding the air with its heavy wings, it righted itself and flapped back to its nest in the rafters. ''I'm trying to train him to fly around inside the store,'' said Mr. Alicea, an employee. ''A few more of those and he'll learn.''Although raising and training birds requires the undying patience of a kindergarten teacher, pigeon keeping in New York  traditionally has also had a competitive side that calls for the cold-blooded decisiveness of a field marshal. That's because most pigeon keepers are engaged in a kind of pigeon war game, played out over the rooftops of low-rise neighborhoods in the city. The objective is basic: capture enemy pigeons by luring them to your roof along with your birds.ERIC ALICEA was admiring photographs of his award-winning Damascene pigeons when a flutter of feathers sliced the air, accelerated past the sales counter and smacked loudly into the plate glass window. A huge white King Homer pigeon had leaped from its perch inside the Maspeth Bird Store in a vain attempt to launch itself over the flat garage roofs of Flushing Avenue. Pounding the air with its heavy wings, it righted itself and flapped back to its nest in the rafters. ''I'm trying to train him to fly around inside the store,'' said Mr. Alicea, an employee. ''A few more of those and he'll learn.''Although raising and training birds requires the undying patience of a kindergarten teacher, pigeon keeping in New York  traditionally has also had a competitive side that calls for the cold-blooded decisiveness of a field marshal. That's because most pigeon keepers are engaged in a kind of pigeon war game, played out over the rooftops of low-rise neighborhoods in the city. The objective is basic: capture enemy pigeons by luring them to your roof along with your birds.The game, which was brought to this country by immigrants from Italy, has a number of rules of engagement (and a language of its own). The battle is joined when keepers ''roll out'' their birds -- send them skyward -- to mix with one another. When the keepers call their pigeons back, the best-trained birds return to their own coop; others land on enemy turf. These pigeons may be traded for supplies or sold to a store like Maspeth Bird, or returned to their owner either for free or for a predetermined price, often $1 a bird.Shops like the Maspeth Bird Store cater to  pigeon warriors -- most of whom say they are in it only for fun -- by purchasing the captured pigeons and selling them at a profit. There are no other stores like this one listed in Queens. The number across the city is down to just a few from a dozen such shops that flourished in Brooklyn alone, when thousands of pigeon keepers, or ''mumblers,'' controlled air traffic over the city in the 1940's.Benny Romero bought the Maspeth Bird Store a year ago. When he came to New York from the Dominican Republic in the 1980's as a 10-year-old, he noticed a stock of pigeons on the roof of a building near his family's apartment in SoHo. He introduced himself to the pigeon keeper, an old Italian man, and offered to clean the cages for him. ''The old man told me that every roof on every corner used to have pigeons,'' he said. ''It's harder to keep pigeons now.''Pigeon keeping has been in decline since the end of World War II, when high-rises  began to replace tenements and eliminate the essential components of the game: flat rooftops and a concentration of pigeon keepers. But one would not know that from the heavy weekday traffic at the store. Mr. Alicea estimated that about 20 coops were concentrated on rooftops over Flushing Avenue's poorly covered trolley tracks and cobblestones in nearby Bushwick, Brooklyn.Each day pigeon keepers pick up 20-pound bags of bird feed and inspect the catch of the day: black, white and auburn pigeons, in 10-foot-high chicken wire cages. They come by to exchange stories about daily pigeon hijackings and often bring in birds they have taken prisoner. Mr. Alicea, who wears a solid gold pigeon on a chain around his neck, said all of the hundred or so pigeons for sale in the store were acquired in this way, although he and Mr. Romero also bred birds. It is clear that war games are good for business.''Some guy came in the other day and says: 'Yo, I rolled out and lost 80 birds. I've only got 75 left,' '' Mr. Alicea said. ''So I tell the guy, 'Go pick out what you like to buy.' ''Mumblers take pride in the quality of flight instruction they give to their birds. The best-trained birds, Mr. Alicea explained, are the ones that can travel long distances and return to their coop. But it is precisely when a flock is far from home, and flies close to someone else's coop, that they are most vulnerable to being captured.''You got birds that roll out from Corona,'' he said. ''Sometimes you get birds that are coming all the way from the Bronx. When they come close, I try to mix them up. I put my flag out and my birds go up, they hook, they hook and mix with the other birds. Then you take down the flag, they land, and see what you got. It's mostly catch and keep.''Good birds are highly valued, both for breeding purposes and camaraderie. They make loyal pets for lonely pigeon keepers who take refuge from the fast-moving city on peaceful rooftops. Perhaps that is why tempers run so hot when a favorite pigeon lands in someone else's coop.''Sometimes it's a buck a bird or $2 a bird,'' Mr. Alicea said. ''Or you can sell it to the store. But if the other guy is friends with you, you just give him back the bird. That's if you're good for your word. If not, you 'schmock' a bird. You put it where he can't see it and keep him for yourself.''Mr. Romero said: ''You want your birds to fly, to go out into other people's stocks. If the wind is blowing toward another roof and I was to chase them, they'd go right over the other roof. I would lose pigeons because they're over his roof. But that's what it's all about.''The game remains friendly, he explained, only as long as everybody abides by the rules of engagement. ''In the past, if I chase mine and the other guy doesn't chase his -- he only wants to catch -- we'd send someone there to kill his birds.'' These days, when he and his friends are starved for competition, three or four of them drive out of the neighborhood and release 25 or 50 birds apiece to see whose pigeons come back. ''Now it's all done in good taste,'' he said.Well, most of the time.To identify birds that have been captured, mumblers fit them with leg bands that often bear messages that are the aviary equivalent of trash talk. Some bands say: ''Catch me if you can,'' or ''Untouchable.'' Vince, a customer at Maspeth Bird whose flock occupies a rooftop in Ridgewood, Queens, has seen the dark side of the game, and places an order for 100 bands that read ''Catch and kill.'' He tells of a violent pigeon exchange in which the captor gripped the bird's head, derisively told the owner, here, you can have him, and handed him only the body.Most of the time, however, risking birds is like gambling. It makes things interesting.As Mr. Alicea explained, ''We're enemies in the air and friends on the ground.''Families Are Hatched in Weeks, and the Birds Grow FastTRAFFICKING in other people's pigeons is not the only way the Maspeth Bird Store beefs up its stock. Benny Romero, the owner, also breeds pigeons on the roof of a converted loft building in Williamsburg, Brooklyn.Mr. Romero has about 700 pigeons in coops on the roof. Asked where the birds breed, he glanced at the floor and said,  ''There, look.'' One bird squats down, and another jumps on her back. They are quickly surrounded.''Once the hen sits and the male gets on top of her, another five or six males come over and try to interrupt them,'' Mr. Romero explained. ''They try to knock him off.''Almost all the pigeons in Mr. Romero's his stock are a breed known as Flights, so the offspring are mostly purebred, he said. Line breeding, or mating the offspring with its own parents, enhances certain desired physical characteristics, but ''tends to take the brains out of them,'' he said.Breeding starts in February. ''It's a week by the time the birds get settled,'' Mr. Romero said. ''Two weeks later is the first egg. The male and female take turns sitting on the eggs. Then three weeks after that they hatch.''Even though wild pigeons, or ''rats'' as pigeon keepers call them, will breed in just about any secluded spot, the sight of pigeon eggs and baby pigeons may be foreign to many New Yorkers. The reason is that young pigeons do not come out of their nests until they are nearly full grown.But they grow at an astonishing rate. A King Homer pigeon in Mr. Romero's shop fathered two birds recently. About one inch long and featherless at birth, after only three weeks they were about two-thirds the size of an adult. At that age, however, their feathers had not yet filled in, making their sharp, bony beaks seem dangerously elongated.Mr. Romero expects to increase the size of his flock by 500 new birds this season, before the weather gets hot.MATTHEW REISSNEW YORKERS & CO.
They sounded at times as if they were running for actuary-in-chief.''Eight years from now, the massive baby-boomer generation will begin drawing benefits,'' declared Gov. George W. Bush.They sounded at times as if they were running for actuary-in-chief.''Eight years from now, the massive baby-boomer generation will begin drawing benefits,'' declared Gov. George W. Bush.Vice President Al Gore countered, ''The numbers just don't add up, and under the Bush plan a serious reduction of our national debt is simply impossible.''The issue under discussion by the presumptive Republican and Democratic nominees for president was a vital one, if not exactly the sort that stops voters' hearts: how to protect the Social Security system, which both candidates say is slowly going broke. Speaking in Southern California, Mr. Bush announced a plan for reforming the federal retirement-benefits system that would allow workers to invest some of their payroll taxes in private accounts.''There is a fundamental difference between my opponent and me,'' Mr. Bush said. ''He trusts the government to manage our retirement. I trust individual Americans.''Mr. Gore argued that Mr. Bush's plan misplaces its trust by exposing workers' retirement money to the mercy of the markets and making it impossible for the government to pay down the national debt. ''Tens of millions of investors who have not gone through the Fordham Business School,'' Mr. Gore said, ''would be placed in a situation where a lot of financial shenanigans could take place.''The vice president also revealed a protective streak with his own investments. After Mr. Bush told reporters that Mr. Gore had a lot of money in stocks, Mr. Gore replied that he had not invested in the markets in 25 years for fear of an appearance of a conflict.The back-and-forth over money matters came as a New York Times/CBS News poll showed that most voters are thinking less about candidates' detailed fiscal calculations than about how nice they seem. Mr. Bush was favored over Mr. Gore in the new poll by 47 percent to 39 percent, and although more respondents liked Mr. Gore's stands on the issues, they liked Mr. Bush even more as a person.PETER MARKS
WHEN David M. O'Brien, a government professor at the University of Virginia, took his students on a tour of the Supreme Court recently, they ended up in a private question-and-answer session with a justice who abruptly turned to presidential politics. He blurted out several hot-button issues involving federalism, and said the future composition of the court would dramatically affect the outcome of those cases.''Vote carefully,'' the justice, a Republican appointee, implored the students assembled in a stately white oak conference room.WHEN David M. O'Brien, a government professor at the University of Virginia, took his students on a tour of the Supreme Court recently, they ended up in a private question-and-answer session with a justice who abruptly turned to presidential politics. He blurted out several hot-button issues involving federalism, and said the future composition of the court would dramatically affect the outcome of those cases.''Vote carefully,'' the justice, a Republican appointee, implored the students assembled in a stately white oak conference room.To this justice, and to interest groups on the left and the right, the 2000 presidential campaign is not so much about whether Al Gore or George W. Bush makes it to the White House. It's about whom Mr. Gore or Mr. Bush would put on the Supreme Court, where vacancies are  likely, if not in the next four years, then certainly in the next president's potential second term. Three of the nine justices are age 70 or older.In just about every speech, Mr. Gore warns that religious conservatives like Pat Robertson and Jerry Falwell would ratify prospects for the bench in a Bush administration. His advisers were emboldened last week when the court, in a 5-to-4 ruling, overturned parts of the Violence Against Women Act, in a rebuke to Congress's efforts to use interstate commerce rules to preempt state powers. That ruling, they said, would galvanize women who feel they have been left more vulnerable to gender-motivated violence.Conservatives are just as determined to make the court a high profile issue. As the Christian Coalition put it in a memorandum to its members, ''The stakes of this first election of the new millennium are extremely high: three Supreme Court judges.''While that sounds like hyperbole -- and, indeed, makes for successful fund-raising appeals -- in this case it may be true. The next president's most lasting legacy could be the Supreme Court, which during the next presidential term will probably decide the constitutionality of school choice and late-term abortion.Vacancies will be all the more important because the court now is as riven over the major issues of the day as is the House of Representatives across the street. The president also can stock the lower federal courts with judges to his liking.Yet for all the breathless warnings on both sides, there is no evidence that voters think about the Supreme Court when they pick a president. The subject is never cited on a list of top concerns of voters, which typically include education and health care. Instead, campaigns have traditionally made the court an issue to help turn out the most loyal Democratic or Republican base voters -- but not to attract independent and swing voters who will decide the election.Mocking a reporter's question about the relevance of the Supreme Court in November, Stanley Greenberg, a Democratic pollster, said, ''The American people are hanging on the 5-4 majority and the federalism issue! In focus groups they talk about it all the time!''Mark Mellman, another Democratic pollster, explained, ''We've never seen it being important. Everybody raises it because the political cognoscenti believe it should be important -- and they just can't believe that it's not.''Perhaps it is a reach to expect voters to elect a president based on an imponderable: he may or may not appoint new justices, who would then deliberate on issues that have yet-to-be determined.Only infrequently, when there is a drama like the nomination of Clarence Thomas in 1991 or the failed nomination of Robert H. Bork in 1987, does the public pay attention. With the most celebrated exceptions of Roe v. Wade, the 1973 ruling that legalized abortion, and Brown v. Board of Education, which in 1954 paved the way for school desegregation, it is difficult for people to translate their vote for president into how the Supreme Court might alter their lives.''If Bush or Gore says, 'Vote for me because in 2015 Medicare or Social Security will be in better shape,' I don't think that's going to motivate a lot of voters because of the lack of immediacy,'' said Stuart M. Benjamin, a professor at the University of San Diego School of Law who was a clerk for Justice David Souter. ''That, in effect, is what voters are being asked to do with the Supreme Court.''RECOGNIZING that the court carries little political weight with most voters -- and perhaps that his views could put off the moderates he will need in November -- Mr. Bush never raises the subject. When asked, he reassures conservatives by suggesting that his nominees would be ''strict constructionists,'' uncomfortable with Roe v. Wade, though he has insisted he would not administer a litmus test to make sure his running mate shares his anti-abortion position.Unlike Mr. Bush, Mr. Gore has not been timid about saying he would pick justices who share his pro-choice views.Even President Clinton weighed in the other day. ''If they get two to four appointments on the Supreme Court,'' he said, ''I think Roe v. Wade will be repealed and a lot of other things that have been a part of the fabric of our constitutional life will be gone.''The hope among Democrats is that they might turn the court into an issue that goes beyond their party base, and draws away moderates who are intrigued by Mr. Bush. There is a possibility for the court to be more at the fore in this campaign because in the next several weeks it is expected to hand down decisions on a series of controversial issues: federalism, partial birth abortion, gays in the Boy Scouts and a challenge to the Miranda warning, which requires police to advise suspects of their rights before beginning an interrogation.Ronald A. Klain, a former chief of staff to Mr. Gore and the member of the White House counsel's office who ran the selection process of Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg, refused to concede that voters will be indifferent to court rulings like the one last week that invalidated a central provision of the Violence Against Women Act.''A lot of swing voters in this election are moderate women who care about their lives and their rights,'' Mr. Klain said. ''Whether the Supreme Court thinks that Congress has the power to enact a statute to protect them from hate crimes will be an important issue to them.''DETERMINED not to politicize the court, justices have an unspoken rule that they do not retire in an election year (unless of course, mother nature leaves them no choice.) And, if possible, they often try to stay put until the president who can replace them is of the same party as the one who appointed them. It may well be that none of them will budge over the next four years.Still, after November, there is the possibility for retirements: Justice John Paul Stevens, 80, is the oldest member of the court; Chief Justice William H.Rehnquist is 75, and Sandra Day O'Connor is 70.''Clarence Thomas is good for another 50 years,'' Senator Arlen Specter, a Pennsylvania Republican on the Judiciary Committee, said of the youngest justice, who is 51. ''But you've got Rehnquist and Stevens and O'Connor who are along in years.''In making the case for the significance of the court as an issue in November, Mr. Specter went so far as to construct a new, highly unlikely, American voting bloc. ''The Supreme Court may be important with the intelligentsia,'' he said. ''But that would be, perhaps, a critical swing vote.''
To the Editor:Re ''Benefits and Drawbacks to Bush and Gore Proposals for Overhauling Social Security'' (news article, May 19):Al Gore's proposal to use the current Social Security trust fund surplus to pay down the federal debt and then, in the future, transfer the interest savings to Social Security is criticized as being ''little more than a paper-shuffling exercise and would still leave taxpayers on the hook to pay for the shortfall in funds.''To the Editor:Re ''Benefits and Drawbacks to Bush and Gore Proposals for Overhauling Social Security'' (news article, May 19):Al Gore's proposal to use the current Social Security trust fund surplus to pay down the federal debt and then, in the future, transfer the interest savings to Social Security is criticized as being ''little more than a paper-shuffling exercise and would still leave taxpayers on the hook to pay for the shortfall in funds.''The critics do not mention, however, that the fund surplus is being lent to the federal government at far below market rates. Thus Social Security has been and continues to be bailing out the federal government, and by extension the taxpayers, rather than the other way around.If market rates were paid to borrow the trust funds, the shortfall would largely disappear. This could be done by the federal government or by state or local governments with superior credit ratings.ROBERT COWEN  Flushing, Queens, May 19, 2000
THE convicted murderer's commencement address to the students at Antioch College in Ohio had to be recorded from one of the phone calls he is allowed in the break from his maximum security, 23-hour lockdown cell in Pennsylvania. The sound quality was poor, the voice scratchy, but the convicted cop killer Mumia Abu-Jamal, living on death-row, sounded quite up to the pomp and circumstance of the occasion.''Think of the lives of those people you admire,'' the one-time Black Panther told the graduates from his prison. ''Show your admiration for them by becoming them.''THE convicted murderer's commencement address to the students at Antioch College in Ohio had to be recorded from one of the phone calls he is allowed in the break from his maximum security, 23-hour lockdown cell in Pennsylvania. The sound quality was poor, the voice scratchy, but the convicted cop killer Mumia Abu-Jamal, living on death-row, sounded quite up to the pomp and circumstance of the occasion.''Think of the lives of those people you admire,'' the one-time Black Panther told the graduates from his prison. ''Show your admiration for them by becoming them.''Simultaneously, and no less passionately, students elsewhere on the campus were being inoculated against the ''absurd myths'' of the Abu-Jamal cause, in the words of Maureen Faulkner, the widow of the white Philadelphia policeman whom Mr. Abu-Jamal was convicted of shooting to  death in 1981. ''Yes, I do want Mumia Abu-Jamal to be executed,'' she fervidly declared. The widow stood surrounded by a group of police officers who, like the students and assorted other activists drawn to the case across the past 19 years, sense the approach of a defining moment in what has become an issue of international concern about the state of criminal justice, capital punishment and racism in the United States.Mr. Abu-Jamal, whose appeal to the federal courts for a new trial could receive a response any day now, has become the most recognizable death row inmate in the land as the United States experiences the collective dissonance of taking the lead among industrialized countries in executing criminals (and the rate continues to rise), even as mainstream politicians increasingly voice doubts about how capital punishment can  ever be fairly meted out to accused murderers who cannot afford a competent defense.Last week, the New Hampshire legislature voted final approval to abolish the death penalty -- a moral gesture for the lawmakers, since a gubernatorial veto was promised and no one is on death row there. But the stand accentuated the growing call for a moratorium on executions that was endorsed earlier this year by Gov. George Ryan of Illinois, a pro-death penalty Republican suffering ''grave concerns about our state's shameful record'' in meting out the death penalty to people later found to be innocent.The moratorium call has risen along with the tide of executions. It was endorsed in 1997 by the American Bar Association. The Nebraska legislature followed suit. Even George Will, the conservative polemicist, cautions that ''skepticism is in order'' when it comes to executions, if only because of  government's record of failure and ineptitude in all manner of public service.The fairness of Mr. Abu-Jamal's conviction, which came during a period of turbulent race relations in Philadelphia, has long been debated, investigated and reinvestigated along starkly partisan lines. ''It almost reminds me of the O.J. case,'' said Officer Daniel Faulkner's old partner, Garry Bell, describing how factual disputes about ballistics and witnesses have become dwarfed  by such issues as the morality of capital  punishment, racism in the judicial system and the nation's booming ''prison industrial complex,'' as critics term the growing prison population and those who administer it.''It's mind-boggling; none of us here in 1981 could have envisioned what is happening today,'' said Mr. Bell, while insisting Mr. Abu-Jamal deserves execution.Some outside investigators are not so sure. ''The trial was grotesquely unfair and included fabricated evidence,'' contends Stuart Taylor, the legal affairs columnist for The National Journal. Among other things, he notes that the police claim that Mr. Abu-Jamal loudly, proudly, confessed to the shooting did not show up in the official  record until two months after the crime.''Still, Abu-Jamal may not be the right poster boy to mobilize persuadable people beyond the left,'' adds Mr. Taylor. He speculates that some facts suggest the defendant, found wounded at the death scene with his  legally registered gun lying nearby, might indeed have shot the policeman, but in an unplanned confrontation possibly involving elements of provocation and self-defense. He might, in other words, be neither guilty  nor innocent in any unmitigated sense. But Mr. Abu-Jamal, a black radio journalist long critical of the city police, never testified one way or the other at his trial, rebuffing his court-appointed attorney as he complained of rampant racism.MR. ABU-JAMAL, today 45 years old, had no previous arrest record at the time. He alleges that his constitutional rights were violated wholesale by police, prosecutor and judge in his furious trial in Philadelphia in 1982. While investigators like Mr. Taylor say he has never clearly denied the shooting or explained his version of events, his defenders insist only a fair retrial can establish the facts and prove his innocence.Mr. Abu-Jamal's cause, in any case, is clearly flourishing. His charge that he had been railroaded by a racist system began reaching an audience beyond Philadelphia in 1995, when National Public Radio began  broadcasting his prison life commentaries. They were quickly dropped amid listeners' complaints, but by then the world had been alerted and Mr. Abu-Jamal's celebrity-cum-notoriety grew, vastly abetted by the World Wide Web, where argumentation never ceases on behalf of convict (www.j4mumia.org and innumerable other sites) and victim (www.danielfaulkner.com).Six thousand believers in Mr. Abu-Jamal gathered earlier this month in Madison Square Garden in Manhattan and thousands more demonstrated in European capitals,  blocking some Paris intersections. When a five-member French delegation showed up last month in Philadelphia with 50,000 protest signatures (''We represent the city of Bobigny''), their path had been blazed by Francois Mitterrand's widow, Danielle, who visited Mr. Abu-Jamal in prison. His cause has drawn sympathy from movie actors and world leaders, from Ed Asner to Nelson  Mandela. Amnesty International joined the call in citing ''a pattern of events that compromised Abu-Jamal's right to a fair trial.''''It's probably the biggest international mobilization since the Angela Davis case,'' said Leonard I. Weinglass, an experienced leftist advocate who is handling the appeal for Mr. Abu-Jamal. His conviction was twice upheld by the state court of appeals, while the United State Supreme Court declined to hear it in an earlier challenge.Oddly, for all the moratorium talk, capital punishment has not yet emerged as an issue in this year's presidential arena. Gov. George W. Bush of Texas has increasingly had to defend his stewardship of his state's  death row, the nation's busiest. But Vice President Al Gore, a supporter of capital punishment, has not dared to press the politically risky issue.Even so, with the Abu-Jamal case now  entwined with the capital punishment issue, his supporters expect the pending court decision to galvanize both causes, whether a new execution date is set or a new trial is ordered. ''We're persisting,'' said Pam Africa, who directs the Abu-Jamal website.  ''This can only get bigger.''Correction:  May 28, 2000, Sunday  An article last Sunday about Mumia Abu-Jamal, the convicted killer of a Philadelphia police officer, referred incorrectly to his former affiliation as a broadcast commentator. While National Public Radio agreed in 1994 to broadcast his occasional commentaries, it reversed itself before doing so, citing ''serious misgivings about the appropriateness'' of using a convicted murderer who was seeking a new trial.Correction: May 28, 2000, SundayAn article last Sunday about Mumia Abu-Jamal, the convicted killer of a Philadelphia police officer, referred incorrectly to his former affiliation as a broadcast commentator. While National Public Radio agreed in 1994 to broadcast his occasional commentaries, it reversed itself before doing so, citing ''serious misgivings about the appropriateness'' of using a convicted murderer who was seeking a new trial.
John Sweeney, the president of the A.F.L.-C.I.O., is doing his country and the labor movement a disservice by fighting so hard against permanently establishing normal trade relations with China. Of all the groups lobbying on this issue, none has made a greater historic blunder than organized labor. By bludgeoning Richard Gephardt and the Democrats into sticking with labor on the issue, which the House is set to vote on this week, Mr. Sweeney is squandering much of the good will he has built up in recent years and damaging the interests of American workers. House Democrats should back the bill, which deserves bipartisan support.President Clinton has had trouble finding a sure footing in his approach on China. He began in 1993 by making tough demands on human rights and now too often looks the other way on these issues. But the administration has reached a formula that is basically sound. Human rights are served, not hindered, by opening China to more foreign goods, particularly in telecommunications and technology, which are bound to bring more information from abroad to the Chinese people. China's membership in the World Trade Organization will allow more scrutiny of its treatment of workers, its record of piracy and even its treatment of the environment.John Sweeney, the president of the A.F.L.-C.I.O., is doing his country and the labor movement a disservice by fighting so hard against permanently establishing normal trade relations with China. Of all the groups lobbying on this issue, none has made a greater historic blunder than organized labor. By bludgeoning Richard Gephardt and the Democrats into sticking with labor on the issue, which the House is set to vote on this week, Mr. Sweeney is squandering much of the good will he has built up in recent years and damaging the interests of American workers. House Democrats should back the bill, which deserves bipartisan support.President Clinton has had trouble finding a sure footing in his approach on China. He began in 1993 by making tough demands on human rights and now too often looks the other way on these issues. But the administration has reached a formula that is basically sound. Human rights are served, not hindered, by opening China to more foreign goods, particularly in telecommunications and technology, which are bound to bring more information from abroad to the Chinese people. China's membership in the World Trade Organization will allow more scrutiny of its treatment of workers, its record of piracy and even its treatment of the environment.Since the late 19th century, the Democratic Party has stood for workers' interests, and it interpreted their interests as being served by free trade. It used to be that big American corporations favored high tariff barriers to protect themselves against cheaper foreign goods, but Democrats saw that workers are served not by insulating their employers from competition, but by food, clothing and other necessities sold here at low prices.The bill before Congress does not open the United States to more Chinese products. Rather, it opens China to more American goods and investment, and imposes a mechanism that can be used to challenge unfair Chinese practices. Labor fears that more investment abroad will lead to less investment at home, and fewer jobs. But if American technology and manufacturing companies are not allowed to compete in China with other foreign investors, they will be less able to serve as healthy employers in the United States. Some American workers will doubtless be hurt by foreign competition. But the solution is to help these workers, not to try to block the forces of economic globalization that are benefiting the country.Mr. Sweeney's reasons for taking on this issue may have more to do with his own political interests than those of workers at large. He won his election with the support of the Teamsters union and is now listening to the Teamsters on this issue. Other unions within the labor coalition are less enthusiastic about the A.F.L.-C.I.O.'s wrongheaded stance. Many Democrats in Congress are angry that organized labor has also opposed lowering trade barriers for Africa and the Caribbean, where some of the most miserably paid workers in the world would benefit. Organized labor claims it is now standing up for Chinese workers by opposing the trade bill. But workers in the developing world know that trade is one of their only avenues of hope.The trade bill could be Mr. Clinton's last tough legislative battle as president. His commendable willingness to stand up to labor and most members of his own party on trade belies his reputation as subservient to his party's core constituencies. On the other side of the aisle, Gov. George W. Bush has shown leadership in repudiating the isolationists in his own party. Organized labor's decision to turn this into a make-or-break test of loyalty for its supporters has been shortsighted and destructive.
By day, Pamela Sybrandy works as a nurse in San Diego. But in her free time, she is a cyberwarrior for Al Gore. Part of a growing band of grass-roots activists, Ms. Sybrandy has set up a Web page -- with no ties to the Democratic Party or the Gore campaign -- to promote Mr. Gore's views on family and children's issues.Until now, Ms. Sybrandy's only political involvement was to gather  bumper stickers and buttons at the local Democratic headquarters. But this year, she said, she looked at her political participation and decided to ''kick it up a notch'' and create a site (www.all4gore.com) to promote Mr. Gore in a way that gave her more clout.By day, Pamela Sybrandy works as a nurse in San Diego. But in her free time, she is a cyberwarrior for Al Gore. Part of a growing band of grass-roots activists, Ms. Sybrandy has set up a Web page -- with no ties to the Democratic Party or the Gore campaign -- to promote Mr. Gore's views on family and children's issues.Until now, Ms. Sybrandy's only political involvement was to gather  bumper stickers and buttons at the local Democratic headquarters. But this year, she said, she looked at her political participation and decided to ''kick it up a notch'' and create a site (www.all4gore.com) to promote Mr. Gore in a way that gave her more clout.In the 2000 election, such independent and home-grown Web pages, created by individual voters with some Web-design skills and a little spare time, are multiplying exponentially and now number about 6,700. Often rivaling the sophistication of the official Web sites of political parties and candidates, these grass-roots Web sites are a new way for ordinary voters to engage in the political process -- a high-tech version, many say, of putting a sign in a voter's front yard or a bumper sticker on a car.''It's kind of democracy at work,'' said Eddie Mahe, a Washington consultant and former deputy chairman of the Republican National Committee. ''Historically, those same things have been said in every campaign. The difference is that they used to be said in a bar or at the corner coffee shop. But now, on the Internet, everyone has a megaphone.''In their unorganized way and by their sheer numbers, grass-roots Web sites are challenging the traditional role of the two political parties and individual candidates of controlling their own messages, to direct grass-roots activism and to orchestrate the rhythm and pace of a political campaign. If the 2000 election is the one in which the Internet meets traditional campaigning, it is also one in which politicians are sorting out whether this grass-roots cyberactivism is a friend or foe.''Politicians don't know if this will be a benefit or if it is where they start losing control of their campaigns,'' said Ari Schwartz, a policy analyst at the Center for Democracy and Technology, a nonprofit organization in Washington.As of last week, 3,775 home-grown Web sites had the Bush name in them and 3,066 had Mr. Gore's name, compared with virtually none containing candidates' names in the last presidential campaign. Not all, of course, support one of the two candidates.  Some praise, some mock, some parody and others simply repeat much of what the two candidates have said or post news articles about them from other sources.So far, the Bush campaign seems to have suffered the greatest sting from parody sites, particularly over questions about whether he used drugs. The Bush campaign, in fact, tried to restrict one scathing Web site, www.gwbush.com, arguing that the site should be regulated as a political committee, but the campaign's complaint was dismissed last month by the Federal Election Commission.''It's like someone walks down the street at lunch time and yells at the top of their lungs that a presidential candidate is wrong or unattractive,'' said Robert F. Bauer, a lawyer for the Democratic Party. ''The candidates cannot demand a retraction or make a citizen's arrest. This is not different.''For the most part, however, these sites are earnest efforts at political activism and, because of that, they raise a number of tricky issues. On one hand, grass-roots Web sites represent a wellspring of new activists for candidates and parties to tap, especially when so many political observers have lamented a decline in voter participation.But this new medium also creates a series of what-if's for the parties: What if a well-meaning Web site contains information the candidate or party believes misrepresents it? What if confusion arises between official party and candidate Web sites and grass-roots ones? What if some of these Web sites contain links to groups on the far right or far left that a candidate would rather not be associated with?And, even more basic, what if these Web sites begin to shift political power away from candidates and parties and to individuals with a large electronic presence?''Until now, guilt by association was a very effective political weapon,'' said one Republican Party official. ''On the Web, heaven and hell are only two clicks away. To criticize a candidate for something on a link that is three or four sites removed from his own Web page will be problematic for every political player on the Web. They are all going to face it.''Makers of these Web sites do not see their activities as a series of what-if's, but rather as a chance to participate in politics -- in their own way, on their own schedule.''If my site was run by the Republican National Committee, they'd be saying, 'Do this' or, 'Don't say that,' '' said Travis Main, a computer technician in Eugene, Ore., who set up www.voterepublican.net. ''I wanted to be involved promoting Republican conservatives. But I didn't have the time to get involved with the parties or be an activist in that sense. The Internet gave me the opportunity to be active and work at it on my schedule.''Starting last August, Mr. Main, who works in a bank, started putting in six to seven hours a day on weekends and at nights building his Web site. Now, he has about 1,500 visits a month and he has cut his work on the site to an hour or two a day.The site has a cartoon logo of a smiling elephant cradling a baby elephant swaddled in an American flag. It contains a directory and links to conservative Republican Web sites and to a wide array of conservative publications and groups. It also posts letters from viewers and holds some discussions on conservative issues.''The thrust of our site is to provide information,'' Mr. Main said. ''There is all this information out there and voters can have a choice about what they want to gather and how they want to act on that. Before, they just had to rely on the local party or reading newspapers.''On the other side of the political spectrum is Robin Orlowski, a junior at Texas Woman's University in Denton, Tex. She runs the PioneerGrrrl Web site, which contains essays by Ms. Orlowski supporting Democratic and female candidates and attacking the Republicans. It also has links to pro-Democratic sites and anti-Bush ones.Ms. Orlowski plans to participate in more traditional campaigning this fall, but she sees her site as a way of expressing her liberal views cheaply and in the spirit of free and open debate.''These sites will increase democracy in the long run,'' Ms. Orlowski said. ''You don't have tightly scripted campaigns as the sole voice. You will have independent citizens voicing their opinions in a way they couldn't before. It's because the Internet is dirt cheap and it costs money to print campaign materials. The Internet is a great free opportunity.''And as Mr. Bush and Mr. Gore know well, it also provides an opportunity for critics to exploit their foibles. For instance, www.all gore.com, recently featured a parody of Mr. Gore saying, ''Elian can live with me.'' And anti-Bush Web sites  like www.georgybush.com feature parody songs in Spanish and English that can be put on CD's for distribution.The Gore campaign has tried to take a low-key view of the sites that make fun of Mr. Gore. ''We try to keep a good sense of humor about them,'' said Todd Webster, a campaign spokesman.Moreover, the Democratic Party has taken a page from the parody book and brought forth a number of sites mocking Republicans, among them www.MillionairesForBush .com, and has picked up some material from a Comedy Central Web site that makes fun of Senator John McCain of Arizona and linked it to  the party's own site (www. democrats.org).Even if much of the material is in jest, however, the creators of these parody Web sites say their intent is serious. ''We will play a small role in the campaign because there are many people coming to our site and who have heard what I have to say,'' said Zack Exley, creator of the gwbush.com site, which he says gets  300,000 to 500,000 visits a month. ''I am trying to make some points that have not been made in the mainstream media.''In a join-them-rather-than-fight-them effort, the Republican National Committee has decided to improve its own Web site -- it has 10 percent of the 150 staff members at its headquarters devoted to Internet campaigning -- so that voters might be more inclined to visit the official committee site (www.rnc.org) rather than to drift into unofficial sites.And the party is making banners, logos and other material available on its site for supporters to download onto their sites. In addition, the national party is sponsoring a workshop -- ''Winning in a Web World'' -- in June to help party organizers and grass-roots supporters with Web campaigning and design. The party is also putting large disclaimers on material on its Web site, so that if it is lifted by groups the party does not approve of, a message comes up saying the Republican Party does not endorse the content of any other Web site.On the Democratic side, the party is asking the Commerce Department to see whether official Web sites for federal candidates should have a separate domain suffix -- .elect or .pol -- to differentiate themselves from unofficial sites. This request was made after a grass-roots site said that it was an official Democratic site and began to collect campaign money. (The site later disappeared.)''We see the Web as the best campaign tool since the phone and the television,'' said Larry Purpuro, the  deputy chief of staff for the Republican National Committee and head of its eGOP project. ''We don't see it as a foe or a threat, but as a great opportunity. We've said, 'It's digital or die.' If we don't embrace, exploit and learn from it, we could be displaced in lots of our activities.''
Four months after he rekindled the death penalty debate by imposing a moratorium on executions in Illinois, Gov. George Ryan now says he strongly doubts any inmates will be put to death while he remains in office.The governor, a Republican, has appointed a commission to study ways to fix problems with the death penalty, but says he will not go ahead with executions unless the panel can give him ''a 100 percent guarantee'' against any mistaken convictions.Four months after he rekindled the death penalty debate by imposing a moratorium on executions in Illinois, Gov. George Ryan now says he strongly doubts any inmates will be put to death while he remains in office.The governor, a Republican, has appointed a commission to study ways to fix problems with the death penalty, but says he will not go ahead with executions unless the panel can give him ''a 100 percent guarantee'' against any mistaken convictions.''I don't know if we'll ever go back to the death penalty as we knew it, as long as I'm governor,'' Mr. Ryan said in an interview on Friday. The governor halted executions in the state after 13 men were sent to death row before being exonerated by new evidence. ''If this commission comes back and says we can't give you a 100 percent guarantee, if they can't tell me the system will be flawless, I've got an obligation to say that I can't go ahead.''The action by Mr. Ryan, a longtime proponent of capital punishment, has helped to renew the national debate on the death penalty. In imposing the moratorium, Mr. Ryan had described the capital punishment system as ''so fraught with error'' and said it ''has come so close to the ultimate nightmare, the state's taking of innocent life.''A national survey in February found support for the death penalty at 66 percent, its lowest level in 19 years. Some 12 states have seen legislation introduced this year to halt executions. On Thursday, the Legislature in New Hampshire voted to abolish capital punishment, the first state to pass such a bill since the Supreme Court allowed executions to resume nearly 24 years ago. The governor of New Hampshire, Jeanne Shaheen, a Democrat, vetoed the measure on Friday.The death penalty commission appointed by Governor Ryan will examine the cases that led to wrongful convictions in Illinois. The panel is being led by Frank McGarr, a former federal judge, Thomas Sullivan, a former United States attorney, and Paul Simon, a former Democratic senator. William Webster, the former director of central intelligence  and of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, will be a special adviser to the commission.The commission includes law enforcement officials, prosecutors, defense lawyers, a businessman and the novelist Scott Turow, among others.Mr. Simon, a death penalty opponent, said it was difficult to imagine that the panel could deliver an iron-clad guarantee to Governor Ryan that, even with certain improvements in the legal system, no innocent person would be convicted of a capital crime.''It is possible we'll come to the conclusion that there's no way to salvage the death penalty,'' Mr. Simon said. But he said he was speaking for himself, not the commission, and added that a majority of the 14 members on the panel support capital punishment.The governor did not give the panel a timetable for its recommendations. But Mr. Simon said the three chairmen agreed to finish the work and deliver findings within about six months.Mr. Simon said the commission would focus largely on the legal representation given to people on death row, who are often indigent.The death penalty, after years of being seen as something of a dead letter in American politics, has lately spawned increasing debate. There are 3,600 people on death rows nationwide, and 87 death row inmates have been freed since 1973.Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, who is expected to be the Republican nominee for president, has said he strongly believes that no innocent person has been executed in his state, which leads the nation in executions.Despite polls showing that a majority of Americans favor the death penalty, Governor Ryan said he received much more praise than criticism for imposing a moratorium. ''A lot of people are telling me it was the right thing to do,'' he said.Richard Dieter, the executive director of the Death Penalty Information Center, said notable concerns about executions have been voiced lately by conservatives, including Pat Robertson, the television evangelist, Oliver L. North, the former Senate candidate, and George Will, the columnist. Tom Osborne, the Republican nominee in the Nebraska Senate race, has taken a strong stance against the death penalty.''A lot has happened since Governor Ryan's moratorium,'' Mr. Dieter said. ''It's hard to imagine that what happened in Illinois, especially the wrongful convictions, hasn't had some effect on what people are thinking.''
INTERNATIONAL3-16Broad Chinese Support For Trade Normalization  The vast majority of influential Chinese agree with the Clinton administration's position that Congress should vote for normal trade relations with China because it would strengthen reformist forces there and ensure its participation in the World Trade Organization.1INTERNATIONAL3-16Broad Chinese Support For Trade Normalization  The vast majority of influential Chinese agree with the Clinton administration's position that Congress should vote for normal trade relations with China because it would strengthen reformist forces there and ensure its participation in the World Trade Organization.1Response to Taiwan Leader  Only two hours after Taiwan's new president Chen Shui-bian made his inaugural address, authorities in Beijing released a surprisingly temperate response, charging him with a lack of sincerity but not repeating the dire threats and invective of recent weeks.16Challenges for Peru President  Now that his opponent in the runoff presidential election has dropped out of the race, President of Peru Alberto K. Fujimori faces the possibility of unending protest marches, criticism from Washington and other foreign capitals, and perhaps even economic sanctions.3South African to Visit U.S.  President Thabo Mbeki of South Africa, after provoking controversy among AIDS researchers around the world, is embarking on his first state visit to the United States since succeeding Nelson Mandela as president last year, and activists and those who treat AIDS are pondering how to greet him.4A Son for the Blairs  Cherie Blair, the wife of Prime Minister Tony Blair, gave birth to a baby boy. Hours later mother, father and son left the London hospital for a quiet weekend at 10 Downing Street. The fourth child for the Blairs, Leo, is the first baby born to a serving prime minister in 152 years.8NATIONAL20-33Death Penalty's Hiatus Likely to Go On in Illinois  Gov. George Ryan of Illinois, who has imposed a moratorium on executions in the state, says he would need a ''100 percent guarantee'' against any mistaken convictions before he would restore the death penalty.20Quiet Leadership in Washington  If all continues to go well, the nation's capital will regain home-rule prerogatives, confirming the stewardship of Mayor Anthony A. Williams, an unlikely politician as bland in his style as the paint on the municipal walls.20Unused Insurance Aid for Poor  Hundreds of millions of dollars set aside by the federal government to help provide health insurance to poor people remains unused because states have not claimed the money, the Department of Health and Human Services has found.22Study to Monitor Cancer Care  Responding to a call to improve cancer care, a leading cancer organization says it will work with other groups to develop a national system to monitor how well each cancer patient is treated.221981 Murder Case Revived  Federal prosecutors in Los Angeles have unveiled an indictment that alleges that a former nightclub mogul, his bodyguard and a pornography actor killed four people nearly two decades ago.33N.R.A. to Battle Gore  The National Rifle Association has declared political war on Vice President Al Gore, using speeches at its convention in Charlotte, N.C., to accuse Mr. Gore of trying to ''disarm the country'' and to urge gun owners to work against his election.28NEW YORK/REGION35-42Congressman Opens Race With Attack on Mr. Clinton  Representative Rick A. Lazio of Long Island roared into the race for senator from New York, attacking Hillary Rodham Clinton as a ''far left'' candidate who has ''no real rationale for serving here other than as a steppingstone to some other position.''1New York Feels Ad Strike  A strike of 135,000 members of the Screen Actors Guild and the American Federation of Television and Radio Artists against the advertising industry is making itself felt in New York. The central issue the in strike is how to pay actors for their work in commercials. About one-third of all national advertising is produced in New York, and the metropolitan region is home to about 55,000 members of the unions.37Fresh Air Fund38OBITUARIES43-44Jean-Pierre Rampal  The Frenchman who popularized the flute as a solo instrument became one of classical music's brightest stars. He was 78.44Robert Burr  A stage actor who played many of Shakespeare's most famous roles, he was 78.44Chess43Weather45Cong. Vote38
The fourth-grade classroom erupted in titters as George W. Bush, one of the class clowns, faced his friends. He had quietly used an ink pen to draw a beard and long sideburns on his cheeks.The teacher, Frances Childress, grabbed George by the arm, yanked him out of class and marched him down the long outside corridor to the principal's office near the main entrance to Sam Houston Elementary School.The fourth-grade classroom erupted in titters as George W. Bush, one of the class clowns, faced his friends. He had quietly used an ink pen to draw a beard and long sideburns on his cheeks.The teacher, Frances Childress, grabbed George by the arm, yanked him out of class and marched him down the long outside corridor to the principal's office near the main entrance to Sam Houston Elementary School.''Just look at him,'' the principal, John Bizilo, recalls Mrs. Childress telling him. ''He's been making a disturbance in class.''The next step was pretty obvious for anyone in the 1950's version of the West Texas oil town of Midland: Mr. Bizilo told George to bend over and then reached for his paddle, the thickness of a Ping-Pong paddle but narrower and twice as long. Mr. Bizilo gave George three ''licks,'' and the boy's shrieks filled the office.''When I hit him, he cried,'' Mr. Bizilo remembered the other day. ''Oh, did he cry! He yelled as if he'd been shot. But he learned his lesson.''So he did.Many of the roots of Mr. Bush's political philosophy as a presidential candidate -- including his belief in tough love for juvenile offenders -- seem to go back to his childhood. Midland, a conservative, up-from-the-bootstraps town that has grown from 25,000 when he was a little boy to almost 100,000 today, mirrors Mr. Bush's optimism, his faith in business and his doubts about an activist  government. While playing Little League baseball, running for class president, or even sobbing in the principal's office, George W. Bush absorbed West Texas values that many old friends say are central to understanding who he is today.''I think his political philosophy comes completely from the philosophy of the independent oil man,'' said Joe O'Neill, a fellow rapscallion in childhood. ''His homage to his parents, his respect for his elders, his respect for tradition, his belief in religion, his opposition to abortion -- that's the philosophy he grew up with here.''Mr. Bush himself, in a long interview about his roots, made a similar point. ''I don't know what percentage of me is Midland,'' he said, ''but I would say people, if they want to understand me, need to understand Midland and the attitude of Midland.''It is in the soil of Midland that Mr. Bush has said he would like to be buried when he dies, and it was to Midland that he returned in the 1970's to marry and start a family. It gave him an anchor in real America.Mr. Bush has often said that ''the biggest difference between me and my father is that he went to Greenwich Country Day and I went to San Jacinto Junior High.'' That may be an exaggeration of the younger Mr. Bush's populist credentials, because he is also a product of Andover, Yale and Harvard. But there is still something to it.The father, chauffeured to and from private school in Connecticut in a black sedan,  suffered politically because of the perception that he was a blue blood who could not relate to ordinary people. The younger Mr. Bush also has been tainted by the idea that he was born into privilege with a visa to effortless wealth and prominence. Yet George W. Bush actually had a rather ordinary childhood, and his years biking around small-town streets in jeans and a white T-shirt left him with a common touch that is among his greatest assets as a politician.''He understands Bubba because there is more Bubba in him,'' Karl Rove, the longtime political adviser to the Bushes, told a reporter in 1992, when Mr. Bush's friends were still carefree enough to say colorful things about him. ''He is clearly the wild son -- even today. Part of it is rooted in Midland, where he grew up in an ordinary neighborhood, where houses are close together and risk was a way of life.''The Midland childhood is a striking contrast to that of another boy growing up at the same time, Al Gore, who instead of being paddled in Mr. Bizilo's office was attending the elite St. Albans School in Washington, swimming in the Senate pool and listening on an extension as his father the senator spoke on the telephone to President John F. Kennedy.Midland, impatient with ideas and introspection, was a world of clear rights and wrongs, long on absolutes and devoid of ethical gray shades. It may be the source of some of Mr. Bush's greatest political strengths, the unpretentiousness and mellow bonhomie that warm up voters, and also of his weaknesses, including an image of an intellectual lightweight that is underscored whenever he mixes up the likes of Slovenia and Slovakia.Boomtown in Black and WhiteIt is easy to see why Midland does not support a postcard industry. It rests on an expanse of flat, baked nothingness. Even its residents, searching for a kind analogy, fumble a bit before coming up with ''moonscape.'' The surrounding land, home to tumbleweeds and rattlesnakes, would depress even a camel, but in the 1950's it had one redeeming feature -- it was loaded with oil.The oil made Midland a boomtown, attracting ambitious businessmen like the elder Mr. Bush and many other out-of-staters as well. These people made for a conservative town but not a redneck one; Midland had a large proportion of geologists, engineers, lawyers and accountants, and Ivy League college graduates were everywhere.Mr. Bush recalls it in Norman Rockwell pastels, and so do many other residents. Children bicycled everywhere on their own, crime was almost nonexistent and if anyone suspicious -- say, someone with a beard --  showed up in town, then-Sheriff Ed Darnell (known as Big Ed) would stop him, escort him to the edge of town, and tell him to ''get out.''Yet what no one volunteers is that it was also rigidly segregated in those days, like most places in the South. Black children went to their own school rather than to Sam Houston Elementary with George Bush. The bus station and train station had separate waiting rooms for blacks and whites, and there were separate, dilapidated drinking fountains marked ''colored'' at the stations and at the courthouse.The Bushes' first encounter with West Texas racism came when they casually invited a black man, working for the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People, to come by their temporary home in neighboring Odessa. The man had the tact to stay away, but neighbors heard about this and warned the elder George Bush to stop these invitations unless he wanted to be tarred and feathered.Racial slurs were routine, and young George picked up the words from neighbors. Once when he was about 7 years old he used one in the living room in front of his mother, Barbara.Michael Proctor, who lived across the street and was playing with George at the time, remembers watching as Mrs. Bush grabbed her son by the ear and dragged him into the bathroom. She washed his mouth out with soap as he spluttered indignantly.''His family was probably the only one around that didn't use racial slurs,'' Mr. Proctor said. ''I probably didn't realize it was wrong until I saw that.''Alongside the racism directed at blacks, there was a measured respect for the Mexicans who came over the border to work in the oil fields. As a boomtown, Midland needed laborers and welcomed Mexican immigrants, who were regarded as hard-working and thrifty. Some old friends find an echo of that attitude in Mr. Bush's efforts to push the Republican Party to reach out to immigrants.''We saw these people cross the border and just wanting a good job,'' recalls Randall Roden, a neighbor boy and best friend. Mr. Roden recalls going out with George and his father to an oil well and spending the night sleeping in the back of the Bushes' station wagon as the crew -- Mexicans among them -- struggled to get the well going.''I formed the very strong impression, and I think George has the same one, that these people came for economic opportunity and worked very hard,'' Mr. Roden said. ''If you wanted a Mexican worker to have a new pair of boots, you'd have to buy it for him. Because if you gave him money, he'd send it home.''Gaining a Foothold in TexasGeorge W. Bush, though born in 1946 in New Haven, Conn., while his father was still an over-achieving student at Yale, moved to West Texas when he was not quite 2 and grew up in this nurturing environment. These days, as the son of a president and scion of a wealthy family, he is often perceived as a child of privilege, but neighbors in those days insist that in the 1950's that was not the case.The Bush family in the Northeast had money, but the elder George left all that behind to make his own fortune in West Texas. Equipped with connections but initially without seed money, George and Barbara Bush and little George, their firstborn, settled in a tiny apartment in the hard-driving oil town of Odessa, where they shared a bathroom with a mother-daughter team of prostitutes living next door.Local people say that you raise hell in Odessa but raise a family in nearby Midland, a much more respectable place. So, after a one-year interlude in California, the Bushes moved to Midland, living in a bright blue 847-square-foot bungalow on a newly built street in which every home was identical -- but painted bright colors to make them seem different. It was called Easter Egg Row, because the houses looked like colored eggs.The family prospered in the oil business and moved into a series of nicer houses in Midland, culminating in one with a swimming pool. But this was not as much of a draw as it might have been. Just down the street lived Peggy Porter, one of the cutest girls in school, and because she had a pool as well, it was in much greater demand than the Bush family's.Occasionally George W.'s grandfather, Senator Prescott S. Bush of Connecticut, would visit and cause a mild stir of interest in the neighborhood. But for the most part, the Bush family was regarded as fairly typical of the out-of-staters.These days, Governor Bush is often seen as a princeling, the son of a president, the scion of a famous family, and Al Gore as more of his own man. But in the 1950's and early 1960's, it was the other way around. Back then, the name George Bush belonged only to an obscure Texas businessman. George W.'s closest connection to the White House was that he was a descendant on his mother's side of Franklin Pierce, America's 14th president. In contrast, in those days ''Albert Gore'' was virtually a household name, belonging to a prominent senator (the present candidate's father and namesake) who was sometimes mentioned as presidential or vice-presidential timber. The senator lost his seat in 1970 and faded into obscurity.Yet young George was not some country hick, and he also learned to fit into the world of his Connecticut grandparents. The family regularly spent part of the summer at the family retreat in Kennebunkport, Me., and in 1954 the father took George and his best friend, Randall Roden, to Washington to see the White House, the United States Capitol and a baseball game with the Washington Senators (whose later incarnation would move to Texas and become the Rangers, owned in part by George W. Bush).They had lunch at the senator's home in Georgetown, and a thirsty Randall promptly demonstrated the distance from Midland to Georgetown by drinking from his finger bowl.When they are tracked down, the boys and girls who once played dodgeball at Sam Houston Elementary School, while now scattered around the country, offer recollections that are very similar: Midland was an idyllic place in which to grow up, and George W. Bush was a very typical child. In contrast to other recent presidential candidates, Mr. Bush in childhood is remarkable primarily for his ordinariness.''He wasn't any different from anybody else,'' recalled Robert A. McCleskey, an old playmate. ''You read about Clinton and Gore and how at that age they were planning to be president. Not Bush.''As a boy, Mr. Bush's ambition was to be another Mickey Mantle.''All George ever wanted to be was a Major League baseball player,'' recalled a buddy, Terry Throckmorton. ''That's all he ever talked about.''A Student of BaseballNo one has ever accused Mr. Bush of being an intellectual, and the indifference to books started early. Childhood friends recall Mr. Bush reading only two sets of books for pleasure -- the Hardy boys and a series of mystery books about baseball. As one asks about his reading habits, there are a few snickers.''Did we sit around in those days reading books?'' asked Mr. McCleskey, smiling broadly. ''No.''George and Barbara Bush led a drive to build a school library (the school did not previously have one), but books were not a major part of a boy's childhood in Midland. Erstwhile acquaintances, while deeply admiring of the Bushes' goodness and decency, have trouble recalling early signs of greatness in the son.''Well, no, I never did think about what he might do in life,'' said Austine Crosby, his third-grade teacher. ''He was just a good, well-rounded young man, and he did his work.''And academically? ''He was O.K.,'' Mrs. Crosby said, a bit defensively. ''He was O.K.''So was he in the top quarter of his class academically?''Well, in the upper half, anyway.''Even if he did not distinguish himself as a student, former classmates describe him as smart and blessed with an excellent memory. He had a passion for baseball statistics, a first-rate collection of baseball cards and a reputation as such a shrewd trader that boys were careful not to agree to a trade with George Bush without thinking it over very carefully.In the mid-1950's, George came up with a scheme that showed remarkable ingenuity and helped make his collection of baseball cards the best around. He began sending baseball cards to famous players, enclosing return postage and a cheery good-luck message, and asking the players to autograph the cards and send them back.This way, he got autographed cards from Mickey Mantle, Willie Mays and other famous players. Some of those cards are now worth thousands of dollars.Mr. Bush's lifelong adoration of baseball began when he and other neighborhood boys would go early to school to play ball. Mr. Bizilo, the principal, would take off his jacket, loosen his tie and hit balls for the boys to field.George was a good ballplayer, friends say, a bit on the small side but making up for it with enthusiasm and aggressiveness. He played catcher for the Cubs, a Little League team, and made it to the town's Little League All-Star team.Becoming a TexanMidland may not have had the best schools, George's onetime playmates say, but -- like Hot Springs, Ark., where Bill Clinton grew up -- it offered a nurturing environment and self-confidence for life.''There's an assurance that you have growing up in a place like Midland, a self-confidence and a real genuine interest in connecting with people,'' said Marge Petty, the other politician in the group (a Democratic state senator in Kansas).In particular, it was in Midland that Mr. Bush first learned to fit in, even if his parents were Yankees and his grandfather a senator. That ability to adapt and bridge groups has never left him.Moreover, Midland values were remarkably unshaken by the 1960's. Some Midland alumni say they let their hair grow a bit longer, but -- like George W. Bush -- they mostly stood with the establishment instead of rejecting it. Very few seem to have protested significantly against the Vietnam War, seriously used drugs, thought of police as ''pigs,'' denounced their parents as oppressors or picked up a copy of Das Kapital.''It's a town of embedded values,'' Mr. Bush recalled, adding that it had ''a heavy dose of individualism and fairly healthy disrespect for government.'' Asked if his own skepticism about the role for government is a product of Midland attitudes, Mr. Bush paused and finally nodded, saying: ''I think there's a parallel there, I do.''Midland was steeped in optimism, and for many people growing up here in the 1950's, the moral of childhood was that the system worked, that anyone who struggled enough in that baking desert had a good chance of finding oil and striking it rich. The trajectory of the Bush family itself, from the apartment with the shared bathroom to the sprawling house and pool, underscored the point.''The lesson lasted with George W. for years,'' said Bill Minutaglio, a Texan who has written a biography of Mr. Bush. ''I think he truly believes that people can win the lottery if they work hard, that if they put their nose to the grindstone it'll all work out without government help or intrusion.''The antipathy for government seems a little odd, from afar, because in those days the oil business depended heavily on quirks  in the tax code to encourage investments. Still, when the people of Midland sought a theater, a hospital and a new baseball diamond, they did not ask the government but raised money themselves and turned out on the weekends to do much of the work on their own.When Mr. Bush talks about ''compassionate conservatism'' or ''faith-based initiatives,'' he evokes what old classmates remember as the spirit of Midland of the 1950's. Asked if that is what he has in mind, Mr. Bush interrupts half-way through the question. ''Yeah, absolutely,'' he said.Those who know Midland are convinced that Mr. Bush is sincere when he preaches compassion and calls for a ''responsibility era.'' But some also admit that it is fair to question the relevance of lessons from a town where raw capitalism made so many people rich and where community spirit wove such a strong safety net.Surviving a Family LossIn addition to church groups, various civic organizations were also active, and one of the local rituals for children was the meetings with cookies and milk at the home of a nice old lady who represented the Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals.The cookies were digested more thoroughly than the teachings.''We were terrible to animals,'' recalled Mr. Throckmorton, laughing. A dip behind the Bush home turned into a small lake after a good rain, and thousands of frogs would come out.''Everybody would get BB guns and shoot them,'' Mr. Throckmorton said. ''Or we'd put firecrackers in the frogs and throw them and blow them up.''When he was not blowing up frogs, young George -- always restless and something of a natural leader -- would lead neighborhood children on daredevil expeditions around town, seeing how close they could come to breaking their necks. George also quickly acquired a colorful vocabulary.''Georgie has grown to be a near-man, talks dirty once in a while and occasionally swears, aged 4 and a half,'' his father despaired in a letter to a friend in 1951. In another letter four years later, he lamented: ''Georgie aggravates the hell out of me at times.''There was one terrible interruption in this relaxed life, occurring when George was 7. He was at school when he saw his parents' green Oldsmobile drive up in the parking lot. At first he thought he saw his 3-year-old sister, Robin, through the window.But his eyes were playing tricks on him. His parents had come to break the news to him that Robin had just died of leukemia. The loss staggered the Bush family, and some friends say that George's closeness to his mother dates partly from his efforts to comfort her at that time.His mother's hair began to turn gray, though she was just 28, and she often dissolved into tears. George's father worked hard and traveled frequently, and so the boy spent much more time with his mother than his father -- acquiring in particular her lacerating wit.Robin's death is something that he has talked about very rarely with friends, and even some of his roommates at boarding school and college did not know about her. But occasionally when the moment was right, he would confide to friends about his tears and grief at the time, about his incomprehension that Robin could have been dying without his parents telling him.Close friends say he had nightmares for years afterward. The death also left him as a quasi-only child, for his next-oldest sibling, Jeb, was six and a half years younger. Neil and Marvin were 9 and 10 years younger than George, and Dorothy was 13 years younger. So while George occasionally used Jeb as a punching bag in childhood squabbles, and always relished his role as elder brother, most of the time his playmates and confidants were friends and roommates rather than siblings.Soon after Robin's death, George returned to school. Most of the time, the despair was hidden, and on the surface he soon reverted to the wise-cracking imp they had known before.The Seeds of LeadershipMr. Bush's political debut appears to have come in the seventh grade, although both he and his wife, Laura, (who was in the same seventh grade but barely knew him) say they have no recollection of it. Classmates recall that he ran for seventh-grade class president against Jack Hanks.Jack was a formidable candidate, and four years later at Boys Nation he would be elected vice president, defeating a personable candidate from Arkansas named Bill Clinton. Yet in running against George, Jack was less fortunate, and classmates say that George was elected by a narrow margin.''I voted for George because he was cuter,'' recalled Peggy Porter Weiss, ''and in the seventh grade that's what counted.''Still, former classmates say that if they had been told that one of their number would become a presidential candidate, they would not have thought of George Bush. Instead, they say, the assumption would have been that it would be Bill Wood.Mr. Wood, as bright and ambitious as he was athletic, beat out George Bush on the football field and was the first-string quarterback on the seventh-grade team (Mr. Bush was the second-string quarterback). Mr. Wood eventually became the junior high school and high school student council president and even headed the statewide association of student councils. If any young man in Midland seemed destined for the White House, classmates remember, it was he.''Since then, the only thing I ever ran for,'' said Mr. Wood, now a lawyer and a bit flattered and amused by the memories of his classmates, ''was the school board.''Political JourneysArticles in this series will examine the lives of the presidential candidates ast the campaign progresses. The nest article will explore Al Gore's dual boyhood, in Washington and in Carthage, Tenn.
The leadership of the National Rifle Association declared political war on Vice President Al Gore today, using speech after speech before more than 2,000 cheering members here to accuse Mr. Gore of trying to ''disarm the country'' and to exhort gun owners to organize against his election this fall.''The N.R.A. is back,'' said Charlton Heston, the organization's president, who is expected to be elected to an unprecedented third consecutive term. ''All of this spells very serious trouble for a man named Gore.''The leadership of the National Rifle Association declared political war on Vice President Al Gore today, using speech after speech before more than 2,000 cheering members here to accuse Mr. Gore of trying to ''disarm the country'' and to exhort gun owners to organize against his election this fall.''The N.R.A. is back,'' said Charlton Heston, the organization's president, who is expected to be elected to an unprecedented third consecutive term. ''All of this spells very serious trouble for a man named Gore.''The combative tone of this year's convention has been a far cry from the more muted, defensive mood of last year's event, which was held just days after the shootings at Columbine High School and was shortened to one day from three.During nearly two hours of speeches today, the organization's leaders maintained a barrage of attacks against Mr. Gore -- whom they repeatedly called a liar -- and the Million Mom March for gun control, held last Sunday, which they called a campaign event for the vice president.''It wasn't a grass-roots rally but a Gore campaign rally, scripted and coached by the White House,'' Wayne LaPierre, the organization's executive vice president, said of the march. ''It wasn't about safety. It was about Gore for president. But Mr. Gore, you're going to find out it's not smart to lie to mom.''None of the speakers mentioned the name of Mr. Gore's Republican rival, Gov. George W. Bush of Texas. But N.R.A. officials said that it was likely the group would endorse Mr. Bush after the Republican National Convention this summer and throw its substantial resources behind him  -- provided he does not try to distance himself too much from the group.Mr. Bush has been an ally of the N.R.A. in Texas, signing bills to allow residents to carry concealed weapons and prohibiting municipalities from filing lawsuits against gun makers. But the governor has distanced himself somewhat from the group, needing to court centrist voters. Despite that, N.R.A. officials said today that they still view Mr. Bush as a friend.''I haven't seen anything George W. Bush has said about this organization or issue that I disagree with,'' James J. Baker, the N.R.A.'s chief lobbyist in Washington, said in an interview. ''He was, and is, a great governor from the standpoint of knowing where to put the emphasis: on prosecuting the criminal use of guns.''Even as they avoided invoking Mr. Bush's name, today's speakers repeatedly inched closer to urging N.R.A. members to vote for him, if only to defeat Mr. Gore.''There's a political campaign raging in America,'' said Kayne Robinson, the group's first vice president. ''If one of the candidates is elected, the Constitution, including the Second Amendment, will be safe. If the other candidate is elected, the Second Amendment will not be safe.''Mr. Robinson, the chairman of the Iowa Republican Party, was captured on videotape in February telling an N.R.A. gathering that if Mr. Bush was elected, the group would have ''a president where we work out of their office. Unbelievably friendly relations.''Mr. Bush has denied that the N.R.A. would have undue influence, but gun-control advocates and Mr. Gore seized on the remark to accuse the Texas governor of being beholden to the powerful group.''George W. Bush and the N.R.A. are working hip holster to hip holster to promote an irresponsible platform,'' Chris Lehane, Mr. Gore's spokesman, said in response to today's remarks.Beyond today's speeches attacking Mr. Gore, there is ample evidence that the N.R.A. has been strengthening its ties to the Republican Party. Campaign finance records show that the group has contributed more than $1 million to the Republican National Committee and Republican Congressional candidates this year, but only $111,000 to Democrats.Moreover, the two members of Congress on the N.R.A.'s board of directors, Representative Bob Barr  of Georgia and Senator Larry E. Craig of Idaho, are Republicans. And today, the organization announced that Grover G. Norquist, the president of the antitax group Americans for Tax Reform and an influential figure in the Republican Party's conservative wing, had been elected to its board.Mr. Norquist's group, through its mailings and independent advertising campaigns, has been effective in helping Republican candidates in recent years. Mr. Norquist and N.R.A. officials said they have not made any plans to marry their efforts this fall, but both left open the possibility.''There is just nothing like the N.R.A., certainly there is no similar counterpart on the left,'' Mr. Norquist said in an interview. ''Gun control is going to be an expensive issue for the left. They are going to lose seats because of it.''Capping off the Republican flavor of the day, Representative J.C. Watts of Oklahoma, the fourth-ranking Republican in the House, was scheduled to give the keynote speech tonight.''Vice President Al Gore is the type of politician where nothing is sacred, that will say and do anything to preserve their own political future, even if that means using fear and deceptive means,'' Mr. Watts was to say, according to an advance text of his speech. ''His party used to say, 'There's nothing to fear but fear itself.' Now the vice president has nothing to offer but fear itself.''For all the recriminations between Mr. Gore and the N.R.A., the fight in many ways benefits both sides by energizing supporters. Mr. Baker acknowledged today that attacking Mr. Gore and President Clinton has helped the group's membership drives.''When people feel threatened, they tend to join and contribute,'' he said. He added that if Mr. Bush is elected and the Republicans retain control of Congress, ''we probably would lose members.''Even as they claimed responsibility for repeatedly knocking down gun-control legislation in Washington, N.R.A. officials told their members that the Clinton-Gore administration had spent the last seven years assaulting their right to bear arms. And the officials warned, often with an urgency that even some N.R.A. members found hyperbolic, that Mr. Gore would take immediate steps toward confiscating their weapons once elected.''For the next six months, Al Gore is going to smear you as the enemy,'' Mr. Baker told N.R.A. members. ''He will slander you as gun-toting, knuckle-dragging, bloodthirsty maniacs who stand in the way of a safer America. Will you remain silent?''Closing out the speeches, Mr. Heston dramatically lifted a replica of a Colonial musket and then paraphrased a popular N.R.A. bumper sticker that reads, ''I'll give up my gun when you take it from my cold, dead hands.''''As we set out this year to defeat the divisive forces that would take freedom away,'' he said, ''I want to say those words again for everyone within the sound of my voice to hear and to heed, and especially for you, Mr. Gore: 'From my cold, dead hands!' ''
In December, Barbara Bush, the former first lady and mother of Gov. George W. Bush, declared in an interview with ABC News that the Republican Party should not take a stand on abortion in its national platform. ''I believe in states' rights,'' she said, ''and I don't think it should be in the national platform. There's nothing a president can do about it anyway, in all honesty.''Her words are about to come back to haunt her son, who has said he will fight to keep the Republican Party's anti-abortion plank at this summer's national convention.In December, Barbara Bush, the former first lady and mother of Gov. George W. Bush, declared in an interview with ABC News that the Republican Party should not take a stand on abortion in its national platform. ''I believe in states' rights,'' she said, ''and I don't think it should be in the national platform. There's nothing a president can do about it anyway, in all honesty.''Her words are about to come back to haunt her son, who has said he will fight to keep the Republican Party's anti-abortion plank at this summer's national convention.Republicans for Choice, an organization that has threatened noisy, divisive demonstrations at the convention if the plank is not removed or modified, is preparing to run 30-second radio advertisements that call on Mr. Bush to ''listen to your mama'' rather than to the hard-right conservatives who tend to dominate the party's platform deliberations.''Heed her, not Pat Robertson and Ralph Reed,'' says the advertisements' narrator, Adrian Cronauer of ''Good Morning, Vietnam'' fame. ''Listen to your mama. That's a family value we can all agree on.''
To the Editor:Re ''Bush Candidacy Puts Focus on Executions'' (front page, May 14): Many American citizens favor the death penalty and rightly so, particularly where the crime involved cold-blooded murder done with malice aforethought.TED KONDOLEON  King of Prussia, Pa., May 17, 2000To the Editor:Re ''Bush Candidacy Puts Focus on Executions'' (front page, May 14): Many American citizens favor the death penalty and rightly so, particularly where the crime involved cold-blooded murder done with malice aforethought.TED KONDOLEON  King of Prussia, Pa., May 17, 2000
Agilent. Naviant. Novient. Scient. Teligent. Are the new economy's neologisms starting to blur?Yes, a certain dot-com conformity appears to be spreading in the naming and branding of technology companies. Four 26-year-old partners at a Web-design firm in Chicago have put up a parody Web site that takes you, the e-client, through the process of selecting a name, logo and motto for your new business.Agilent. Naviant. Novient. Scient. Teligent. Are the new economy's neologisms starting to blur?Yes, a certain dot-com conformity appears to be spreading in the naming and branding of technology companies. Four 26-year-old partners at a Web-design firm in Chicago have put up a parody Web site that takes you, the e-client, through the process of selecting a name, logo and motto for your new business.Nearly 50,000 different visitors have toured the site since it opened last month, the creators say.The site, eNoricom.com, presents 18 slides that depict the steps, beginning with the ''patented Nametron 3000'' machine to create a ''best-of-breed name that conveys the essence of your brand's soul.''After the Nametron spits out the name Similant, the word is run up the flagpole of a fictional focus group, a family of four. Dad finds that Similant evokes a ''very strong customer focus.'' For Daughter, the name is virtually synonymous with ''global.''Then, noting that ''nothing says innovation and cutting edge like having a curved swoosh in your logo,'' the site presents more than a dozen examples -- from Ameritech, to Gore 2000, to tickets.com -- before producing a suitably swerving nameplate for Similant, replete with an ''@'' instead of the ''a.''For focus-group Mom, the Similant logo signifies that ''anything is possible.'' For Son, it cries out ''empowered.''Finally, the site observes the popularity of three-word taglines, like ''Point. Click. Rent'' for apartmentguide.com and ''Beauty. Inspiration. Shopping'' for gloss.com.For Similant, the concocted tagline is ''Really. Really. Different.'' (Mom's impression: ''people focused.'' Daughter's: ''frictionless.'')Matt Linderman, a creator of the parody site, said the point (besides getting laughs) was to convey his own firm's philosophy that good Web design helps people communicate and interact.''It upsets us when we see these big companies acting Orwellian, making up words to make themselves sound important,'' Mr. Linderman said. ''Everyone sees logos like that all the time. But it's not until you see 30 of them together that you say, 'Wow, this is kind of ridiculous.' ''And what name did Mr. Lindeman's 10-month-old Web company select for itself? An arcane one: 37signals.The name, he explains, alludes to an experiment led by the astronomer Carl Sagan in the 1980's in which billions and billions of signals from outer space were analyzed by a radio telescope. Only 37 were identified as potential signs of intelligent life.''We liked this,'' Mr. Linderman said, ''because our goal is to create and propagate Web sites that show signs of intelligent life.''TIM RACECOMPRESSED DATA  Correction:  May 23, 2000, Tuesday  A report in the Compressed Data column of Business Day yesterday  about a parody Web site that takes visitors through the steps of naming an Internet company and choosing its logo misspelled the site's address. It is eNormicom.com, not eNoricom.com.Correction: May 23, 2000, TuesdayA report in the Compressed Data column of Business Day yesterday  about a parody Web site that takes visitors through the steps of naming an Internet company and choosing its logo misspelled the site's address. It is eNormicom.com, not eNoricom.com.<br>
Up on the roof of the Washington hotel where he grew up, the old Fairfax, now a much tonier Westin, Vice President Al Gore was standing at the edge. There is no railing on the roof of the eight-story building and Mr. Gore was trying to goad a reporter into following him there. ''I'd catch you,'' he said, and he seemed amazed that anyone would decline such a sporting challenge.Mr. Gore had taken a reporter and photographer back to his former home on Massachusetts Avenue, and while the return visit did not seem particularly emotional -- no Barbara Walters moments, certainly -- it did bring back memories of how cranky old Senator John McClellan of Arkansas would get, in the suite below the Gores, when Al Gore dribbled his basketball.Up on the roof of the Washington hotel where he grew up, the old Fairfax, now a much tonier Westin, Vice President Al Gore was standing at the edge. There is no railing on the roof of the eight-story building and Mr. Gore was trying to goad a reporter into following him there. ''I'd catch you,'' he said, and he seemed amazed that anyone would decline such a sporting challenge.Mr. Gore had taken a reporter and photographer back to his former home on Massachusetts Avenue, and while the return visit did not seem particularly emotional -- no Barbara Walters moments, certainly -- it did bring back memories of how cranky old Senator John McClellan of Arkansas would get, in the suite below the Gores, when Al Gore dribbled his basketball.Inside the building, Mr. Gore gestured toward a door. ''This woman down here had great Jell-O, so I'd go down and visit with her,'' he said, as if he were half-hoping that she might still come out and invite him in.The Gores' two-bedroom apartment has been totally rebuilt, but the view from the roof is still mostly unaltered. ''This was a key escape route,'' he said, taking the stairs up into the open air. And on the roof, he was reminded of some of the childish tricks he used to spend hours there perfecting.''I'd lay on my belly on the edge'' and lower a toy duck, tied to a thread, down slowly, trying to bop those walking into the hotel on the head just as they went through the door, he said. He also hurled water balloons at cars stopped at the red light below, and ''I hate to admit this,'' he said, ''but I would scare the birds up here, with distressing results for the windshields'' of cars on the street.Coming back down the stairs, he spied a small indentation in the wall where he used to hide ''whatever a 10-year-old didn't want someone to find.''''Some of my stuff may still be in there,'' he said. But no, it had been sealed off and painted over.
The Federal Trade Commission plans to go to Congress this week to seek tough new privacy rules for Internet businesses. But the nation's consumer protection agency is likely to encounter skepticism from key Republicans and from industry groups about the government's ability to impose regulations without stifling the innovation fueling the new economy.Indeed, the opposition began mustering its arguments as soon as the F.T.C. reversed its previous policy by voting on Friday to ask Congress for new powers to control the ways Internet companies collect and use information about consumers.The Federal Trade Commission plans to go to Congress this week to seek tough new privacy rules for Internet businesses. But the nation's consumer protection agency is likely to encounter skepticism from key Republicans and from industry groups about the government's ability to impose regulations without stifling the innovation fueling the new economy.Indeed, the opposition began mustering its arguments as soon as the F.T.C. reversed its previous policy by voting on Friday to ask Congress for new powers to control the ways Internet companies collect and use information about consumers.''A year ago, when the performance of Web sites was rated less favorably than they are currently being rated, the commission voted against legislation,'' said Representative Billy Tauzin, Republican of Louisiana, chairman of the House Commerce subcommittee that oversees Internet privacy.''Today with the finding that Web sites have improved dramatically their privacy policies, they are now recommending legislation,'' he said. ''It seems to be a contradiction that needs to be understood.''And yet, while high-technology industry groups continue to insist that any new rules are unwarranted and premature, companies themselves have differing views on whether and what types of new laws might be warranted.Microsoft insists no legislation is needed. EBay, the auction giant, indicated it could support some sort of minimal regulation if it curtailed states' rights to impose a patchwork of differing rules. Bell Atlantic said baseline rules could be useful.The only common theme expressed by Internet businesses over the weekend seemed to be that if Congress proceeds with legislation to regulate consumer privacy protections online, that it do so cautiously.''We are all sensitive to this issue,'' said Robert Levitan, chief executive  of Flooz.com, which deals in online gift certificates. ''We know we are in the spotlight and we are going to be held to a higher standard.''DoubleClick, which places advertising on Web sites on behalf of other companies, became a lightning rod for online privacy issues after it disclosed a plan -- since deferred -- to combine consumer information gathered online with personal data gathered offline through direct-mail databases and other means.''I would like to think that industry could self-regulate, but I think we all have accepted the fact that there will be some regulation,'' Mr. Levitan said. ''We're not jumping up and down complaining about regulation. We're just saying, let's do it wisely.''If caution means slow, companies are likely to get their wish. Given the complexity of both election-year politics and the fast-changing medium involved, most lawmakers agreed that the chances of passing Internet privacy legislation this year were all but nil. But this year's debate could set the stage for action next session.Although the Internet privacy issue in Congress does not split along party lines, Representative Ed Markey, a Massachusetts Democrat who supports strong privacy regulation, predicted on Friday that Republicans would block the consumer protections.Representative Tom Davis, Republican of Virginia and co-chairman of the House Internet caucus, responded with the implication that the administration was behind the F.T.C. move. ''This is an election year, and I think sometimes the direction they get from up high is to stir this up a little bit.''Still, it remained unclear over the weekend whether the White House would back the F.T.C. effort, which comes after the recent completion of a survey by the commission that found that only about 20 percent of major companies on the Internet had adequate standards for protecting the privacy of Internet users. Since 1997, the Clinton administration has pushed a laissez-faire approach to the Internet. And just last week, a top Commerce Department official told a House hearing on privacy that self-regulation appeared to be working.With both parties trying to attract the support -- and dollars -- of the technology industry, the issue could become a tricky one politically for Vice President Al Gore.Details of the F.T.C.'s survey findings and its legislative proposal will not be released until the agency conducts briefings around Washington on Monday.But a government official who has seen the 60-page recommendation said it would suggest only moderate legislation to set baseline rules that could be used in conjunction with self-regulation efforts like the seal programs that are used by some Web sites to certify they follow their stated privacy practices. After three years of monitoring the progress of privacy on the Internet, the official said, the F.T.C. had not seen sufficient protections to avoid regulation.''This is one step forward, not a massive leap into a highly regulated, draconian bureaucratic structure,'' said the official, who predicted Mr. Tauzin and others would be less critical after seeing the details of the Web survey and the F.T.C.'s recommendations.But industry groups began pre-emptive strikes over the weekend.On Sunday, the Direct Marketing Association released its own survey of Web sites showing that 93 percent of major Web sites posted privacy policies and that most of those gave customers notice of how that information was used and the opportunity to keep that information from being transferred to third parties.''Clearly, self-regulation has taken hold with lightning speed,'' said H. Robert Wientzen, president and chief executive of the association.The Information Technology Association of America issued a statement from its president, Harris Miller, who called the F.T.C. report ''a first step down the slippery slope of government regulation of the Internet.''Internet company executives, meanwhile, seemed most concerned about the effect new regulations might have on innovation.Just hours after the F.T.C. voted on Friday, Microsoft and several other companies were demonstrating technologies that are being developed to protect consumers at a weekend privacy retreat in Leesburg, Va., that was sponsored by the United States Chamber of Commerce's National Chamber Foundation.Richard Purcell, director of corporate privacy for Microsoft, pointed to efforts to incorporate privacy protection technologies into Web-browsing software. ''This is not the proper time to stop or chill that very substantial effort that is being made,'' Mr. Purcell said.Another company, the DataTreasury Corporation, showed lawmakers technology that allows consumers and businesses to conduct all of their online transactions through DataTreasury's secure system.''Whatever regulations are implemented today may not be relevant tomorrow,'' said Michael Hershman, chairman of Decision Strategies Fairfax International, a security company in Fairfax, Va. ''This technology creates an entirely different mode of doing business.''It's hard to predict how these regulations might be written and how they might be enforced,'' he added. ''Once you start down that road you are never sure where you might end up. I've seen many regulations written that you think say one thing and do another.''Tom Tauke, an executive with Bell Atlantic, said some action might be appropriate.''There can be steps taken in public policy that can be very helpful in creating a climate in which businesses can flourish and consumers' privacy can be protected,'' Mr. Tauke said. ''I don't think that Congress should slow down in the privacy area. I think Congress should get it right.''Other companies said baseline federal legislation was better than the patchwork of laws being considered by states.Tod Cohen, public policy director for eBay in Washington, said, ''We would work with the F.T.C., Congress and the administration to develop a national standard'' -- provided it pre-empted further action by states to regulate Internet privacy.Mr. Levitan agreed. ''We need a uniform code across the country,'' he said. ''We need a standard law on privacy and taxation. But let's do it wisely and make it easy for Internet companies to comply.''
Senator Albert Arnold Gore of Tennessee never ran a negative campaign. In his first senatorial race, against an octogenarian incumbent, Kenneth McKellar, in the Democratic primary of 1952, he told friends it would be unseemly to make an issue of his opponent's age.That season's hot tag lines: ''Thinking feller, vote for McKellar,'' versus ''Think some more, and vote for Gore.''Senator Albert Arnold Gore of Tennessee never ran a negative campaign. In his first senatorial race, against an octogenarian incumbent, Kenneth McKellar, in the Democratic primary of 1952, he told friends it would be unseemly to make an issue of his opponent's age.That season's hot tag lines: ''Thinking feller, vote for McKellar,'' versus ''Think some more, and vote for Gore.''Mr. Gore won that one, and 18 years later his political career also ended on the high road. In that last losing race, against Bill Brock, a Republican, in 1970, he never aggressively answered a range of attacks, including the untrue accusation that he had personally benefited by routing Interstate 40 through land he owned and the unfair suggestion that he had forgotten his roots while chasing after the Kennedys at Georgetown dinner parties.The Watergate investigation showed that Nixon operatives had poured illegal campaign funds into the race. Some of the money came from Richard Mellon Scaife, the same conservative who later spent millions on anti-Clinton investigations and activities.And the man who defeated Senator Gore eventually apologized for the divisive tone of the campaign. His slogan, designed to appeal to disaffected whites supporting George Wallace, was ''Bill Brock believes in the things we believe in.''Born poor in the remote settlement of Possum Hollow, Tenn., Mr. Gore lived through the worst of the Depression and spent seven years working his way through college by teaching in a one-room school -- he would spend one year earning money, then the next year spending it on his studies.He loved music, played a mean fiddle, and always said he ran for office because as a kid he had seen the picture of a cousin who was running for the State Legislature on a utility pole and liked the idea of seeing his own face up there.But he was also moved by ideas, and was a committed free trader and New Dealer who believed that, as he said, ''nothing cures poverty like money.'' He married a strong woman, a fellow lawyer, Pauline LaFon, and spent much of his career defending unpopular stands, like his opposition to American involvement in Vietnam and his refusal to sign Senator Strom Thurmond's Southern Manifesto, which encouraged Southerners to defy court decisions on desegregation. (He did, however, vote against the Civil Rights Act in 1964 -- an election year for him -- and wrote in his memoirs that that vote was an enduring regret.)He felt no Southerner had a real chance at his party's presidential nomination but hoped to serve as vice president, and he campaigned hard, against Senator John F. Kennedy of Massachusetts and a fellow Tennessean, Senator Estes Kefauver, in an effort to become Adlai Stevenson's running mate in 1956. Mr. Kefauver won.Mr. Gore was hopeful again in 1960, but Kennedy chose Lyndon B. Johnson. At Mr. Gore's funeral, his son joked about the senator's longtime longing for the No. 2  job: ''Now that's humility.''
AT 69, the former senator, cabinet officer and party chairman is enjoying what would be for some the pleasures of retirement, like a power boat on the Severn River or an afternoon walk around the Colonial-era streets of Maryland's capital -- not to mention cheering the Naval Academy's football team.But Bill Brock is anything but retired. For several years he had been working quietly, as chairman of Intellectual Development Systems Inc., on a program to help school systems overcome learning problems. For the last few weeks he has been working noisily to rebuild the current presidential nominating system.AT 69, the former senator, cabinet officer and party chairman is enjoying what would be for some the pleasures of retirement, like a power boat on the Severn River or an afternoon walk around the Colonial-era streets of Maryland's capital -- not to mention cheering the Naval Academy's football team.But Bill Brock is anything but retired. For several years he had been working quietly, as chairman of Intellectual Development Systems Inc., on a program to help school systems overcome learning problems. For the last few weeks he has been working noisily to rebuild the current presidential nominating system.Although he concedes that ''every reform I ever voted for has come back to bite me,'' Mr. Brock is leading an effort among Republican leaders to begin the primary season with the smallest states and put the biggest states, like New York and California, last.The plan, if adopted at the Republican convention this summer and put in effect by the states, is intended to enable people in every state to feel involved in the choice of presidential nominees, and thereby in the system generally. This year, for example, Republicans had high turnout in early states, through the March 7 primary. Then, ''it was just like falling off a cliff, in terms of participation,'' Mr. Brock said. ''Nobody came from then on.''By starting with small states, the system would encourage lesser-known candidates without lots of money. ''You place your primary emphasis on retail politics, face-to-face campaigning in small settings, small groups where people can ask questions looking the candidate in the eye and hear his response or her response. The candidates can get a much, much clearer sense of what is bothering Americans by walking their neighborhoods than they can by standing in front of a television camera -- or reading a poll.''Jim Nicholson, who holds the party chairmanship that Mr. Brock occupied from 1977 to 1981, put him in charge of reinventing the primaries last summer, creating a commission of several party elders.Mr. Brock represented Tennessee in the House and the Senate, and after his time as party chairman, when he rebuilt the machine that Ronald Reagan led to victory, he served in the Reagan administration as trade representative and secretary of labor. In the Senate, he cast some votes for what he thought was reform. He supported encouraging the development of political action committees. He voted for the 1974 Federal Election Campaign Act, which imposed a $1,000 limit on campaign contributions, which he said worked pretty well for the 1976, 1980 and 1984 elections, before the blossoming of soft money.He does not argue that the new primary system would solve all the problems in the system. Changes in campaign financing are essential, too, he said.''I think soft money is an abomination. I think what has happened to P.A.C.'s has dismayed all of us who thought it was a reform when we voted for them in the early 70's after Watergate. Obviously, the $1,000 limit is a problem because it is worth less than $300 now in real terms. So that is ridiculous. And all of these are pieces of the whole. All of these are parts of the problem, and if you try to deal with one aspect and not the complete package, you are not going to get things done.''The urgency of acting soon settled on the commission, Mr. Brock said, when ''we saw this whole thing come to a crashing halt, effectively, on the 7th of March. People began to realize that it is not just the financial side, it is the whole process that requires remedy.'' He added, ''Doesn't it scare people that we have elections in America where nobody comes? That is a terrifying statement.''Many leaders from big states oppose the plan because they think the nominating contest would end before it reached them. And even if Mr. Brock gets his proposal through the Republican National Committee and the convention, he knows it won't be very effective unless Democrats agree.It looks like the Republicans must make the first move. Their current party rules can only be changed by the convention. The Brock plan would ask the convention to allow the national committee to change the rules between conventions. Then a deal could be struck with the Democrats, who can change their rules between conventions.MR. BROCK speaks kindly about the Democrats who are watching to see if he will succeed. ''The Democrats have a particular problem,'' he said. ''Their rules are very difficult to change'' because it takes a ''two-thirds majority. It effectively allows almost any significant group of opponents to block reform. That's the challenge they face. I'm very sympathetic to their problem.''The Bill Brock who came to Washington in 1963, or even the one who beat Al Gore Sr. for the Senate in 1970, would not have been tolerant of Democrats. But he changed in the Senate.''I came in riding my white horse with my armor burnished, ready to slay the dragons of the left,'' he said. ''It was amazing how little I thought of Hubert Humphrey until I got to know him, and then how much I loved him. We didn't have to agree on issues. You know, viewed from afar, people don't look as good as they can look up close. It's really hard to hate somebody that you have to live with and work with. You begin to have an appreciation for and a respect for the process. The system works, and you have to pay attention to it and make sure it continues to work because the world does change.''PUBLIC LIVES
For seven years now, very little has gone as planned in Bill Clinton's effort to shape a new relationship with China. Now, amid increasing confidence among White House officials this weekend that they will prevail in one of the most crucial Congressional votes in a decade, the president who came to office knowing little about China may leave claiming he fundamentally altered Washington's relations with Beijing.For Mr. Clinton, the problem has not been a lack of vision. Once in office, he quickly cast away his campaign attacks on President Bush for ''coddling dictators'' in Beijing. And since 1994, he has steadily built on his theme that the Internet and China's growing economic ties to the West would ultimately create pressures for political openness that Beijing will not be able to control.For seven years now, very little has gone as planned in Bill Clinton's effort to shape a new relationship with China. Now, amid increasing confidence among White House officials this weekend that they will prevail in one of the most crucial Congressional votes in a decade, the president who came to office knowing little about China may leave claiming he fundamentally altered Washington's relations with Beijing.For Mr. Clinton, the problem has not been a lack of vision. Once in office, he quickly cast away his campaign attacks on President Bush for ''coddling dictators'' in Beijing. And since 1994, he has steadily built on his theme that the Internet and China's growing economic ties to the West would ultimately create pressures for political openness that Beijing will not be able to control.The problem has been one of execution. The Chinese have hardly cooperated, jailing more dissidents even as Mr. Clinton argued that economic freedom would eventually produce political freedom. Nor has there been much help from the president's fellow Democrats, most of whom have fought his trade and China policies at every turn.But in recent weeks, Mr. Clinton has sworn to close friends and colleagues that he will not let himself repeat the same mistake he now blames himself for making at least twice before -- letting the politics of the moment, or even the prospect of a war within his own political party, pull him back from a step he is convinced is the best hope of keeping China from becoming an adversary.''He knows he blew it in 1995 and again last year,'' said one of Mr. Clinton's foreign policy advisers, referring to Mr. Clinton's decision to grant a visa to Taiwan's president in 1995 to visit the United States, and then to walk away last year from a sweeping trade deal with China's reform-minded prime minister, Zhu Rongji.So with the passion of a convert, Mr. Clinton is spending hours each day arguing the merits of a strategic vision he took years to adopt. In small gatherings in the Yellow Oval Room of the White House residence and even aboard Air Force One as he took New York Democrats to his wife's formal nomination for the Senate race, he has offered lectures about competing scenarios of what America's dealings with China may look like in 2025.In public, his aides say the vote, scheduled for Wednesday, is still too close to call. ''We don't have the 218 to pass it, and the opposition do not have 218 at this point, in my opinion, to stop it,'' Commerce Secretary William Daley, who is leading the administration's lobbying drive, said today on CBS' ''Face the Nation.''In private, however, many of Mr. Clinton's advisers suspect the bill to give China permanent trade status -- thus ending an annual Congressional review -- will pass by a margin of 10 votes or more, chiefly because of the support of Republicans. The Republican whip in the House, Representative Tom DeLay of Texas, said today that ''we're moving toward that magic number of 218,'' giving much of the credit to lobbying by the president.For Mr. Clinton, the vote may be the last hope of making a deep imprint on foreign affairs in his second term. With time running out for a Mideast peace accord or a new arms deal with Russia, the outcome of the vote has taken on huge importance in the president's mind.''He hates the word, but it's the legacy thing, in a big way,'' said one cabinet member.But even if Mr. Clinton wins, the victory may feel incomplete.Mr. Clinton acknowledges that for all his talk about the benefits for America of economic globalization -- how it opens new markets for American exports and innovation -- fewer Democrats are with him on this than on the1993 passage of the North American Free Trade Agreement. He told a colleague not long ago, ''I'm doing this despite my party, not with it.''Even allies say that is because his commitment to rebuilding the China relationship and pursuing a trade policy for a new era of globalized commerce has waxed and waned.''As in so many things,'' said Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan, a leading advocate of the trade bill, ''he too often let the politics of last month or next month affect decisions toward China that go to half-century strategic issues.'' Only in recent times, he added, ''has the president begun to see this in historic terms.''So far, the White House strategy has been fairly straightforward. Mr. Clinton has largely let others argue the economic benefits, and avoided direct engagement with the labor unions that fear that any gains from an increase in exports to China will be outweighed by the movement of American jobs there.Instead, the president has focused his arguments on national security, saying the real point of letting China into the World Trade Organization is to further economic engagement to give a boost to China's reformers and prevent the two nations from drifting into adversarial roles.But with the coalition in Congress so fragile, Mr. Clinton's staff has carefully shielded him from much public engagement about the deal. They canceled a television address to the nation this evening, for fear it would anger undecided Democrats. After lengthy discussions, they declined to make him available for an interview on his seven years of dealings with China, again out of concern he might say something that could cost a few needed votes.To the enormous frustration of the White House, the Chinese are hardly aiding Mr. Clinton's cause. In past years, when Congress was gearing up for a vote on the annual renewal of trading status, Beijing usually released a few long-imprisoned dissidents.But this time, as Mr. Daley said recently, ''the Chinese certainly aren't making it any easier.'' While they moderated their reaction to the inauguration this weekend of a new Taiwanese president, Chinese authorities have continued to arrest members of the Falun Gong religious group, and recently sentenced a leader of the fledgling Democracy Party to a long term in prison. Mr. Clinton, curiously, has made no recent public comments about those arrests.Mr. Clinton and his team have tried to turn China's continued crackdowns to their advantage, arguing that the trade deal, by ushering in Western technology, legal systems and ideas, will ultimately undercut the ability of the Chinese government to repress dissent.At the United States Coast Guard Academy on Wednesday, the president took this argument further than he ever has before, making the case that ''when over 100 million people in China can get on the Net, it will be impossible to maintain a closed political and economic society.''''He's right, but it will take a generation,'' said Sandra Kristoff, who headed the Asian operations of the National Security Council in Mr. Clinton's first term. President Jiang Zemin of China is taking the other side of that bet, hoping that -- like Singapore -- he can reap the benefits of an open economic system while suppressing, or at least managing, true political opposition.Mr. Clinton will likely be deep into retirement before historians can assess whether he or Mr. Jiang have guessed right. But it is already clear that Mr. Clinton's journey to his strategic vision of dealing with China was a long road with many unintended detours.His first 18 months in office were spent digging his way out of his own campaign rhetoric. His comments had inflamed the Chinese, and Sen. Max Baucus, a Montana Democrat, said, ''I remember telling him one day that the first step was that he had to treat China with respect.'' Mr. Clinton, he said, ''seemed surprised.''By the end of 1993, and a disastrous trip to China by Secretary of State Warren Christopher, it was clear that the president's effort to link China's trading rights to its performance on human rights and arms proliferation was collapsing. It was a short intellectual leap to granting permanent trade status.''There was no evidence that we ever gained any leverage over the Chinese with annual renewal,'' said Charlene Barshefsky, Mr. Clinton's trade representative. ''It was an empty threat. We knew it, and the Chinese knew it.''Mr. Clinton reversed course, saying he could make more progress with China through engagement than with threats -- the conclusion his predecessors had reached.Then in 1995, with his re-election looming, Mr. Clinton allowed Lee Tung-hui, Taiwan's president, to make a private visit to Cornell University for a college reunion, over the objections of many advisers. Mr. Clinton feared that denying the visa would prompt Congress to rewrite the Taiwan Security Act, worsening relations with Beijing. But he underestimated the outrage in Beijing.Mr. Clinton now views that as a mistake. ''There were two stages to his learning about China,'' said one former adviser, who dealt with China policy daily. ''After the campaign he learned that China was a lot more complex than he believed. And now he's learned the second part -- that dealing with China means putting the security interests first, and not letting politics get in the way.''If that was the lesson, it was forgotten again in April 1999. By that time Mr. Clinton and Mr. Jiang had exchanged visits to China and the United States, and gotten to the final stages of the 13-year-long negotiations for China's entry into the World Trade Organization. Mr. Zhu, the prime minister who has come to personify China's economic reform movement, arrived in Washington ready to end the wrangling with an offer of a huge range of openings.Many advised Mr. Clinton to take it; but he listened to Treasury Secretary Robert E. Rubin and Gene Sperling, the head of the National Economic Council, who feared that if a deal were struck, Congress was in no mood to pass it.Mr. Clinton realized almost immediately he had made a mistake, but it was too late. Once the United States accidentally bombed the Chinese embassy in Belgrade during the air war over Kosovo just a few weeks later, talks froze. They were not resumed until marathon negotiations in November, and then some of the terms had changed -- for better, and for worse.''The previous deal couldn't have passed,''' Mr. Sperling said recently, referring both to the details of the pact and the Congressional climate. ''This one can.''
The last thing Al Gore's father told him, a few days before he died, and just before he lost the ability to speak, was: ''Son, always do right. Always do right.'' His father, the senator, felt he had himself done right a lot of the time, and reliably kept after his son to follow suit.After the vice president talked about that last conversation, though, in a eulogy he had worked on without sleeping for two nights straight, even some friends wondered whether his father had tacked on a Hollywood ending, scripting his goodbyes at least in part for the benefit of the papers, and maybe the history books. This time, nobody came right out and accused Mr. Gore himself of tweaking the dialogue.The last thing Al Gore's father told him, a few days before he died, and just before he lost the ability to speak, was: ''Son, always do right. Always do right.'' His father, the senator, felt he had himself done right a lot of the time, and reliably kept after his son to follow suit.After the vice president talked about that last conversation, though, in a eulogy he had worked on without sleeping for two nights straight, even some friends wondered whether his father had tacked on a Hollywood ending, scripting his goodbyes at least in part for the benefit of the papers, and maybe the history books. This time, nobody came right out and accused Mr. Gore himself of tweaking the dialogue.Even the rawest and most intimate moments in his life are now widely seen as mere theatrics, all part of a presidential campaign strategy designed by his ambitious, up-from-nothing parents, Albert and Pauline LaFon Gore, before he was born, and even unto death.That perception has clearly become a political problem for the vice president. Gov. George W. Bush of Texas regularly suggests that Mr. Gore is a natural-born phony, and the vice president's every remark is now fact-checked so scrupulously that when he recently said he had once dreamed of becoming a teacher, reporters wondered if he could prove it. Had anyone ever heard that story before?The questions are about more than Mr. Gore's assertions about the Internet and ''Love Story.'' What in his life was scripted and what was real? Could even he know the difference? Where did his parents' hopes end and his own begin? And do you only get credit for hosing out hog parlors if you did it without an agenda?But in separating the facts from the fanciful in Mr. Gore's life, perhaps the most striking discovery is the extent to which the material that is the most widely doubted is also the most demonstrably true: Al Gore did do a lot of his growing up in Tennessee. He did work hard on the farm there -- so hard, in fact, that the hired help felt sorry for him, and thought his father should ease up.In the same way, some of what is generally assumed about Mr. Gore's life is not true: he did not, for example, live in luxury back in Washington during the school year.Mr. Gore's parents were both famously frugal and were not well off until after their son had grown and after the senator's political career had ended. Though they sent their children to exclusive schools and provided such social necessities as ballroom dancing lessons for their son, they also dressed him in a cousin's hand-me-downs and lived in a hotel because it was owned by a relative who gave them a break on the rent.Some summers, the Gores had to pack up their four-room suite and put their belongings in storage so the place could be sublet while they were in Tennessee. And Al shared a bedroom with his sister, Nancy, who was 10 years older, both before and after her college years.Part of the reason that the contours of Mr. Gore's unusual upbringing are not better known, however, is that he himself has worked so hard to discredit a lot of authentic stories about his childhood -- the very stories, in fact, that would probably do him the most good politically. The problem, for him, is the scenes from the past that portray Mr. Gore sympathetically at the expense of his hard-driving parents. They suggest an emotionally neglected boy forced to bear the weight of enormous adult expectations, and Mr. Gore, who is fiercely protective of his 87-year-old mother and the memory of his  father, categorically balks at that.For a time, a decade ago, after his unsuccessful 1988 presidential campaign and his son's near-fatal car accident the next year, Mr. Gore himself seemed determined to explore the meaning of his own life story. He made a serious study of family dysfunction -- the subtext of his 1992 environmental manifesto, ''Earth in the Balance'' -- and passed out copies of Alice Miller's ''Drama of the Gifted Child,'' a book about how narcissistic parents can leave their high-achieving children cut off from their own feelings and hazy on just what they want, other than to make Mom and Dad proud. Back then, friends said, he was absorbed by the need to figure things out, to emerge from his father's shadow. To decide.But today, Mr. Gore seems nothing if not decided. He does want to be president, and if he can never really know exactly how much of that want began with his parents, his current attitude seems to be: So what? ''One of the oldest plots in the human story is child follows parent,'' he said recently, with what sure seemed like authentic boredom. And looking back on his early years did not seem so very difficult.In a series of interviews about his life, he was relaxed and appeared at peace with the past. He frankly described a childhood in which even the usual juvenile scrapes might become part of continuing political calculations -- maybe the same way writers often end up milking their families for material. When he got in trouble for throwing whitewash on trucks as they passed the Gore farm when he was 12, for example, his father made him send letters of apology to a number of trucking companies. ''That was also an election year, I believe,'' he remarked wryly. But, he made clear, it was also just a kid's life.From the Farm and the City''I was conceived in Tennessee,'' Mr. Gore began, drawling for effect, in a radio announcer voice that poked fun at the whole biographical exercise.Though his political opponents have successfully portrayed him as a pure-bred Washington creature, with only photo-op moments in the heartland, he did have a life there, on the family farm, and by all accounts a more intense emotional connection to that place than to the nation's capital.His real childhood was in Tennessee; in Washington, he spent his time with adults --  important adults, in whose presence he was expected to behave beautifully, and did. Tennessee was, at the very least, where Al Gore wished he had grown up.His buddies in Tennessee certainly considered Carthage, the small community on the Cumberland and the Caney Fork Rivers, where the Gores spent summers and holidays, as his true home. ''There were not a lot of kids around the Fairfax,'' the Embassy Row hotel where the Gores lived while in Washington, ''so he could not wait to get back home,'' said Steve Armistead, Al Gore's closest childhood friend, and a good pal still.''I went up there'' when Mr. Gore was in high school ''and the friend he had in the Fairfax was a bellhop,'' Mr. Armistead said. ''There were all these dignitaries, but not much for a kid. There was a dullness, a loneliness about it. He didn't lay around Washington much when he could have been in Carthage, and that's where he got his values, working on the farm and growing up around Smith County people.''Of course, Mr. Gore is the product of both Washington and Tennessee -- and of the very fact of having grown up in two places, with two groups of friends and two ways of looking at the world. He was born in Washington, lived in Tennessee from the time he was 1 until he was 4, while his father ran for the Senate, and then moved between the two places until college.This back and forth set him slightly apart from those around him, in season and out, and made him tough to figure. Even his sense of humor is a hybrid, a little bit corny with flashes of sarcasm.Mr. Gore himself seems to feel that his split-screen view of the world was a gift, at least in the end.''Even though I spent more time each year in Washington, Tennessee was home,'' he said. ''Now I'm sure that part of that was me, as a kid, absorbing my parents' insistence on the political reality of their lives, that they were representing Tennessee in Washington. I'm sure I picked up a lot of that as a child. But it was more than that.''He described Tennessee as a place where ''the human relationships were much warmer,'' and where he had his dearest friends.''I think I learned a great deal from the, forgive the word, the parallactic view provided by growing up in two places,'' he says now, ''because just as having two eyes gives you depth perception, having two homes allows you to see some things that stand out in relief when viewed from two different perspectives.''A Tennessee Work EthicMr. Gore's father -- who also favored fancy words -- moved between two worlds, too, and for all his striving in Washington did not believe in leaving either Tennessee or his farm roots behind, ever, even after his career in politics ended.And he and his wife thought that working on the farm would be good for their son, whom they told friends they hoped would be president one day. ''It was expected from the time he was little,'' said James Fleming, a Nashville doctor and friend of Nancy Gore's, who for a time served as the Gore family physician. It was not so much that the Gores thought cleaning out barns would add just the right touch of ''log cabin'' to his resume, family friends said, as that they simply felt it would toughen him up and give him a proper work ethic.''His daddy used to get him up about 6 o'clock in the morning,'' said Mattie Lucie Payne, who worked for the Gores as a housekeeper for more than 40 years. ''And Al would say, 'Daddy, we have men working,' and his daddy would say, 'I know, and you go on down and help them.' ''He baled hay, cut tobacco and cleaned out hog parlors along with the hired help. But the senator also seemed to revel in assigning his son some of the most backbreaking tasks, like clearing 20 hilly acres with a hand ax.''He'd drive him pretty hard,'' said Gordon Thompson, a friend whose family used to live on the Gore farm, back when his own father worked for the senator.But then, he drove himself hard, too. Even at 4-H camp, as a 9-year-old, he asked to be given the heavy-lifting kitchen duty usually reserved for 13- and 14-year-olds. ''He was the only camper I ever had volunteer for K-P,'' said Jerry Cole, the local 4-H agent.For several weeks every summer after school let out, but before his parents could get away from Washington, Mr. Thompson said, Al would stay with them in a house with no indoor plumbing. ''He never complained,'' Mr. Thompson said. ''I think he was always happiest on the farm.''Always, he was serious. ''He pretty much acted the same way when he was 13 as he does now,'' said Donna Armistead, Steve Armistead's sister and Mr. Gore's first real girlfriend, for several years, beginning when he was an extremely confident 13-year-old and she was 16.''He was a terrific listener,'' recalled Ms. Armistead, now a nurse and divorced mother of two. And not just to her, she said. He would pay attention to the old folks at her grandparents' grocery store, and hold his grandmother's hand in the nursing home for long stretches several times a week.Mr. Gore's own mother ''was not very touchy,'' Ms. Armistead said, adding, ''When he came in she just wouldn't come running to hug him.''She said his father used an entirely different voice when he talked with Al. ''He'd talk with authority,'' she said. And nobody, the way Ms. Armistead remembers it, gave him any breaks for being a senator's son.Once, after Mr. Gore and Ms. Armistead  had done a particularly hard job on the farm, the senator told him to take her out for a meal at a certain cafe. ''We were so thrilled,'' she remembered. ''But after dinner Al gets up to the cash register and said, 'My dad said to charge it to him,' and the guy wouldn't do it.''The senator's tab was too long already.''So I had to tell him I'd be right back, and go get the money from my mom,'' Ms. Armistead said.A Touch of MischiefStill, his time in Tennessee was not all boot camp and character building, and Mr. Gore did manage to have some unscripted fun. Mr. Thompson remembers his friend as ''pranky,'' with a love of practical jokes that endures today.One New Year's Eve, several of his friends said, their whole group was snowed in at the Gore farm, so Pauline Gore corralled all the girls in an upstairs bedroom and the boys in Al's room on the lower level. The senator, dressed in his bathrobe, sat sentry duty at the top of the stairs all night long, and every so often yelled downstairs to his son and the other boys, who were busy sharing one bottle of beer.At first light, Ms. Armistead heard a knock on the window, looked out and saw Al and his buddies, who had slipped out a window and climbed up onto the deck outside her room, where they were making snowmen in their underwear for the girls' benefit.''Mr. Albert still thought he had everything under control,'' she said.Her brother, Steve, describes a pretty mild teenage rebellion: ''We did all the experimental things kids do. We'd sneak out at night and pick up Coke bottles off a front porch that probably were not ours, or go to the lake and maybe do a little water skiing at night that was not too smart, and occasionally have a party. We probably did a little bit of alcohol abuse.''But there were also times, even as a kid, when Mr. Gore flouted authority more directly. Once, while staying with the Thompsons, he heard that his father, who was away, was going to be giving a speech in Nashville, 55 miles east. His parents, though, had decided that their son should not come to the event.''He was little,'' 12 at most, Mr. Thompson said, ''but Al went over to Carthage and caught the bus and went down there, still dressed for the farm. That didn't go over too well. His mom called and wanted to know where he was -- that was a biggie. My mom had to tell her he wasn't here. Today, you'd be worried about all kinds of things happening. But they were more concerned about him not being all cleaned up.''Like a lot of mothers, Pauline Gore always insisted publicly that her son was at all times the perfect boy.But was she embellishing a little? At least at times, she apparently thought she had reason to worry.Dr. Fleming said, ''I remember Donna, this good-looking girl, running around the house, and Pauline saying, 'Ohmigod, she's going to get pregnant, I know it.' ''Mr. Gore was not shy about expressing affection for his girlfriend in front of his mother. ''I remember Pauline and I drove him to the airport one time,'' said Ms.  Armistead, ''and he kissed her on the cheek and then he kissed me. I mean, he laid one on me, honey.''Ms. Armistead says the two of them were lectured. ''Miss Pauline said keep busy, don't think about sex, enjoy your time together but always have something in mind to do,'' she said. ''Cold showers and lots of exercise.''But she also says Mrs. Gore need not have worried. ''Sex was sex even then,'' Ms. Armistead said, ''but Al and I both had goals.''Finding a Role ModelToday, the vice president seems to enjoy looking back on the benign pleasures of the summers when he got to be a kid in Tennessee -- skinny-dipping with Mr. Thompson in a cattle trough or hypnotizing chickens, which Mr. Gore says is ''a little-known farm skill passed down from adolescent wizard to adolescent wizard.''Mr. Gore also situates himself politically in Tennessee, as heir not only to his father but to Cordell Hull, whom he describes as ''the model for public service in our part of the country.'' Mr. Hull floated logs down the Cumberland River with Mr. Gore's grandfather, settled in Carthage and became the congressman in the seat the Gore father and son later held.An ardent free-trader, Mr. Hull won the Nobel Peace Prize for his role in founding GATT, now the World Trade Organization, and was secretary of state in World War II. ''But before that he was a judge on the circuit, and in 10 counties there, the picture above the judge's chair in the courtroom is neither George Washington, Thomas Jefferson nor Franklin Roosevelt,'' Mr. Gore said, with the greatest possible reverence. ''It's Cordell Hull to this day.''Asked to name the most important things he had inherited from his parents, Mr. Gore  talked for a long time about his father and his father's ideals. But the first thing he said in answer to the question was this:''Some of what people perceive as the stiffness and formality I sometimes lapse into comes in part from my father's habit of trying to ensure that he always presented a dignified appearance to live up to the position he felt deserved dignity.''People who saw him on the stump and playing the fiddle find that ironic because they don't remember the formal bearing that he had in most of his appearances. He had a capacity to enjoy humor and music and friendship, and he also felt the need to present himself as a senator in a formal and dignified way.''Those who knew the senator say his climb from poverty was still too fresh and stereotypes of Tennessee hillbillies with dirt under their fingernails still too prevalent for him to feel he could afford the luxury of letting his guard down in certain public settings.His father ''always raised cattle, he always farmed, he always found relaxation, even in Washington, by going to the farm and working with cattle,'' the vice president said.''But he became a statesman,'' too, Mr. Gore said. ''I've often thought in my father's persona he continued to manifest both.''His friends feel sure Mr. Gore would move back to Carthage if, as Mr. Thompson delicately put it, ''worse comes to worst.'' The vice president laughed at that, but agreed. ''Well, I'll retire in Carthage for sure,'' he said. ''You know, I hope that's many years from now.''One thing that still strikes all his Tennessee friends as odd, though, is that through all the time he spent there growing up he never spoke a word about Washington. And he absolutely refused to wear any of the neatly folded T-shirts his mother had packed for him -- T-shirts emblazoned with the name of his prep school, St. Albans.''He probably thought we would think he was trying to act like he was better than the rest of us,'' guessed his old friend Edward Blair.But Mr. Gore, who had his boots up on the table in front of him as he talked, snorted when he heard this. ''I guess maybe they were thinking that Washington is such a neat place,'' he said, ''that I would naturally want to tell them all about the great things there.''Few Comforts of HomeIf the Fairfax was a cold place to grow up, it was not because there was no family close by.The owner, Grady Gore, was a cousin of the senator's. Louise Gore, one of Grady's daughters, lived in the hotel. Her sister, Mary Gore Dean, moved in, too, after her husband died in a plane crash. For a while, their brother Jimmy Gore and his family were on the premises, as well. When they moved, it was just down the block.But the vice president is not sentimental about his time there. ''I came to love the farm,'' he said. ''The hotel I never loved.''The senator's correspondence makes clear that he and his family were there because the price was right. The Gores looked for a house in Washington for years, but never found anything they felt they could afford.And one thing that seems to bother Mr. Gore -- far more, in fact, than the idea that his 52 years add up to something that is not so much a life as a story line -- is the perception that ''I was in this luxury apartment eating room service, sort of like Eloise.''Asked if his younger days in Washington were lonely, he sighed. ''Oh, no,'' he said. ''I mean I had good friends and I had my sister. And it's not as if I didn't have my parents. They went out frequently, and every six years they had a hard campaign, but they were great and loving parents, and the times when they were pulled away I had Nancy and my friends. I wasn't left alone with my thoughts.''He got pretty creative about making his own fun, sometimes upending all the furniture in the living room to construct an elaborate fort. But activity was supposed to be purposeful. ''His dad was a very, very proud man and believed that old Cordell Hull thing of you're put on earth for a purpose and it's to improve the condition of life,'' said Mr. Gore's cousin, Mark Gore, who lived down the block.(His cousin also remembers Senator Gore teaching him to swim by throwing him into a pool when he was 4, while Al, who was 7, looked on, laughing.)From fourth grade on, young Al attended St. Albans, the Episcopal boys' prep school on the grounds of the National Cathedral, where he did well but was not, according to friends, especially happy.Throughout high school, he wrote his Tennessee girlfriend, Ms. Armistead, twice a day, and called her on a pay phone every Saturday night.Two of Mr. Gore's closest Washington friends recall that while Al Gore was the focus of his parents' fondest hopes, it was his free-spirited, rebellious sister, Nancy, who took more of their energy. ''The general topic of conversation over there was what outrageous thing Nancy did this week,'' said one of these friends. ''She got a lot of attention and Al was kind of an afterthought, because he never misbehaved.''For him, the best times were those spent throwing a ball around with his father at Grady Gore's estate in Potomac, Md. ''He had some cattle from the Tennessee farm brought up there,'' Mr. Gore said, smirking like he knows that sounds kind of crazy. ''And a lot of times on weekends we'd go up there and he'd work with the cattle and I'd help him and then we'd take a break.'' Sometimes, too, they played catch in the Russell building, outside the senator's office, though if someone walked by, ''he'd duck back into the office until they passed'' because ''it wasn't very dignified,'' the son recalled. When Al Gore had real ballgames, though, it was his sister, not his father, who would come.More often, his father took him to Senate hearings. He sat through long stretches of discussion over the bill, co-sponsored by his father, that created the Interstate System of highways. How wide would the new roads be? Green or blue for the road signs? As a kid, Mr. Gore followed these developments avidly, keeping track of the miles of completed highway the way other kids his age followed the Yankees' box scores.''He also took me on the Senate floor, even though he wasn't supposed to,'' Mr. Gore remembered. And one day, when Al was 5, he was invited to come up front to meet the vice president, Richard M. Nixon, who was presiding that day: ''He put me on his knee and was very nice to me, and the experience forever after deprived me of the more sublime pleasures of Nixon hatred.''Once, Mr. Gore's father let his son listen in on an extension while he spoke to President John F. Kennedy, who at the time was furious at a certain steel executive for raising prices after the steel workers had agreed not to seek a wage increase. ''The family anecdote that my father always told after that -- like a lot of family anecdotes I can't really vouch for -- but he said that I said, 'Dad, I didn't know presidents talked that way.' ''The vice president does have strong memories of Kennedy, though. ''I was blown away by his inaugural address,'' he said. I remember so vividly the thick snow on the seats, and listening to each word bring out such poetic force. Really, it was a remarkable time. My sister was one of the first volunteers for the Peace Corps that month, and the whole family was filled with the excitement of the New Frontier.''They all wanted, each in their own way, to be part of that excitement. And the entire family talked a lot about not just the bills before Congress but the big issues of the day, especially civil rights. In these discussions, was his mother more liberal than his father, as some who knew the couple have suggested? ''Mmmmm, my dad was pretty liberal,'' Mr. Gore answered. ''She was, like most moms, the conscience of the family, but they didn't really disagree. And my sister was more liberal than both of them put together.''Then Mr. Gore started to laugh, and kept on for a good long time. ''It was a family of many consciences,'' he said.''Political Journeys''This is the second in a series of articals on the lives of the presidential candidates. The next article will explore George W. Bush's prep school experience at the Phillips Academy in Andover, Mass.
The National Rifle Association's annual convention over the weekend in Charlotte, N.C., drew nowhere near the massive crowd that took part in last week's Million Mom March for more stringent gun control laws. But the N.R.A.'s power has never depended on rallying vast numbers of people or even favorable opinion polls.Indeed, the mothers' march itself was largely an expression of frustration over the N.R.A.'s ability to block gun control in Congress and the state legislatures even in the face of surveys showing that many more Americans endorse gun control than oppose it -- as well as the depressingly frequent outbreaks of gunfire in schools.The National Rifle Association's annual convention over the weekend in Charlotte, N.C., drew nowhere near the massive crowd that took part in last week's Million Mom March for more stringent gun control laws. But the N.R.A.'s power has never depended on rallying vast numbers of people or even favorable opinion polls.Indeed, the mothers' march itself was largely an expression of frustration over the N.R.A.'s ability to block gun control in Congress and the state legislatures even in the face of surveys showing that many more Americans endorse gun control than oppose it -- as well as the depressingly frequent outbreaks of gunfire in schools.Gun control leaders are now considering how best to channel the energy of the Mother's Day event into a sustained grass-roots political movement. Their first order of business is to focus on why their opponents are so successful.The N.R.A.'s dominance rests mainly on intensity and intimidation. It says it has 3.6 million dues-paying members, a figure seven times larger than the contributors list of the leading gun control advocacy group, Handgun Control Inc. More important is the N.R.A.'s relatively small core of superdedicated members, who can be relied upon to blanket Congress with letters, phone calls and e-mail on a moment's notice, making it appear that the pro-gun constituency is larger than it really is.To reinforce the pressure on Congress, the N.R.A. raises millions of dollars that it then spreads around as campaign contributions to its loyal supporters. It also has a long track record of punishing those who dare deviate from the N.R.A. line by making direct donations to their opponents, and by running ''issue ads'' attacking them -- sometimes disguising the N.R.A.'s sponsorship by raising an issue other than gun control.The N.R.A. also employs a large number of lobbyists who use their knowledge of how laws are written and their close ties to key legislators to water down popular gun control proposals when outright opposition would be politically impossible. Promoting weaker alternatives, and hiding behind calls for stricter enforcement of existing laws -- something everybody supports -- the N.R.A. has succeeded in tying up the modest gun control package that passed the Senate after the Columbine High School massacre last year.Fortunately for the gun control side, N.R.A. leaders have a tendency to say offensive things that undermine their organizational and monetary advantages. In March the group's executive vice president, Wayne LaPierre, suggested that President Clinton was ''willing to accept a certain level of killing to further his political agenda.'' The recent boast by the N.R.A.'s first vice president, Kayne Robinson, that the N.R.A. would have an office in George W. Bush's White House was not a whole lot smarter.The gun control movement needs to be ready to take advantage of these flubs -- much as Handgun Control recently did by running a television commercial publicizing Mr. Robinson's indiscreet bragging. But that is obviously not enough. For too long, the N.R.A. has gotten away with shoddy arguments unsupported by empirical evidence. For example, it has asserted that keeping a loaded handgun handy to use against a possible intruder makes homes safer when, in fact, the opposite is true.If it is to succeed, the gun control movement must be prepared to step up its own public education efforts and to counteract the N.R.A.'s lobbying efforts. That, in turn, means raising more money and building a professional staff. But mostly it means putting pressure on lawmakers using the movement's best asset -- the huge constituency of voters in districts all around the country, including a large number of suburban women, who are fed up with gridlock on gun control.
On Wednesday night, President Clinton will headline the most lucrative political fund-raising event ever, collecting at least $25 million from 12,000 donors packed into the MCI Center here.The record-setting gala, a salute to Mr. Clinton and Vice President Al Gore, will draw thousands of small donors who bought $50 tickets, but also a large number of mega-givers, including 15 to 20 people who have raised or pledged at least $500,000 each. Some of these big givers will share a private dinner with the president and vice president the night before the gala at the BET Jazz club in downtown Washington.On Wednesday night, President Clinton will headline the most lucrative political fund-raising event ever, collecting at least $25 million from 12,000 donors packed into the MCI Center here.The record-setting gala, a salute to Mr. Clinton and Vice President Al Gore, will draw thousands of small donors who bought $50 tickets, but also a large number of mega-givers, including 15 to 20 people who have raised or pledged at least $500,000 each. Some of these big givers will share a private dinner with the president and vice president the night before the gala at the BET Jazz club in downtown Washington.The occasion cements the president's legacy as the most prodigious political fund-raiser ever. Democratic fund-raisers and the White House estimate that Mr. Clinton is responsible for raising at least $500 million and perhaps as much as $1 billion since 1992 for his own campaigns and for Democratic candidates. He is also helping Vice President Gore and Hillary Rodham Clinton collect millions of dollars for their campaigns and is also soliciting money for his presidential library.The $500,000 donors to the gala represent a new level of giving in the arena of soft money, the large, unrestricted contributions to the political parties. Among those who have given or pledged to raise this amount are S. Daniel Abraham, the chairman of Slim-Fast Foods Company; Claire Dwoskin, the wife of a Northern Virginia property developer, and Vinod Gupta, an Internet entrepreneur from Omaha.Mr. Clinton has devoted an extraordinary amount of time to cajoling cash from Democratic donors, speaking at 350 fund-raising events just since January 1997, an average of one every three days. That total includes only the events that appear on the president's official calendar; it does not even capture countless private sessions that have brought additional millions of dollars into Democratic accounts.Lately, Mr. Clinton has also embarked on a campaign to raise $200 million for his presidential library in Little Rock, Ark., a project that just last year was projected to cost $125 million. Multimillion-dollar pledges to the library have been made by wealthy Clinton friends like David Geffen, the movie mogul and co-founder of DreamWorks SKG.Unlike contributors to federal candidates and parties, donors to the library do not have to be disclosed and so far the White House has refused requests from the news media to make public the names of library contributors. The president has been criticized for raising these large, undisclosed contributions for his library while he is in office, although previous presidents have also engaged in similar fund-raising.Mr. Clinton's success in raising money astonishes even those who have closely watched him do it over the years. ''I don't know how you count it,'' said Mark Weiner, a financier from Rhode Island, a friend of Mr. Clinton's and treasurer of the Democratic Governors' Association. ''I would think Clinton has raised $1 billion.''Joe Lockhart, the White House press secretary, said that Mr. Clinton had certainly raised hundreds of millions of dollars and that the figure was probably approaching $1 billion.''It's not even close to debatable that he has raised more money than any other figure in American political history,'' a senior Democratic party official said.Of course, some of Mr. Clinton's more brazen tactics, especially inviting big donors to sleep at the White House and to fly on Air Force One, have drawn criticism as well as scrutiny from federal investigators.Aside from his sheer effort at cultivating wealthy donors from Hollywood to Wall Street, what is the secret of Mr. Clinton's success? His admirers and his critics both said that he combined the celebrity and charisma of a polished entertainer with the power and gravitas of the presidency, a formula that left potential donors energized.Many of the givers also strongly agree with the president's agenda and want to see Vice President Gore and other Democratic candidates continue his policies.Although he has been tireless in his fund-raising duties, Mr. Clinton seldom directly asks his audiences for cash, leaving that task to others, most notably Terry McAuliffe, who is one of the president's closest friends. Mr. McAuliffe estimated that he had raised at least $300 million for Mr. Clinton and Democratic causes, including the 1997 inaugural, the White House millennium celebration, the president's legal defense fund and the campaigns of Mr. Gore and Mrs. Clinton.''In all the years that I've known Bill Clinton, I've never known him to ask someone for a contribution,'' Mr. McAuliffe said. ''He doesn't like it. He'd rather have someone else do it, like me.''From his first campaign for the White House in 1991-92 until this year, Mr. Clinton has voiced support for changing the current campaign finance law, including a ban on soft money. In October 1997, for example, Mr. Clinton appeared with Congressional advocates of campaign finance revisions to demand action on legislation to tighten the laws.''The tide of reform is coming in,'' he said at an appearance in the White House. ''I will fight as hard as I can for as long as I can'' for passage of reform legislation.Asked why he did not forswear the raising of soft money, which led to the scandals and investigations of his 1996 re-election campaign, Mr. Clinton said: ''I'm not sorry that I did what was available under the existing system. But I have always been for changing the system. I'm just not for unilateral disarmament.''Vice President Gore has asked Gov. George W. Bush of Texas to join him in eschewing soft money, but the offer was rebuffed and the soft money race has continued unabated. The two political parties have raised $160.5 million in soft money for the 2000 election, a record for this point in an election cycle.Critics say Mr. Clinton could have devoted his charisma and the power of the presidency to achieving significant changes in the political money game. Instead, they say, he used his skill to stretch it to the breaking point while feeding public disillusionment with politics.''Bill Clinton's presidency on campaign finance has been one of the great squandered promises and missed opportunities of all time,'' said Scott Harshbarger, the president of Common Cause and a former Democratic attorney general of Massachusetts. ''He has eliminated any sense of shame or outrage from the system of money-raising in politics.''Mr. Clinton's fund-raising prowess has generated envy and spawned imitators in the Republican Party, Mr. Harshbarger said. ''The smoothness, the ingenuity, the almost sheer gall -- people saw what was happening and now everyone has just copied him,'' he said.It is impossible to calculate with precision how much money Mr. Clinton has raised since he announced his candidacy for president in 1991. He collected about $30 million in relatively small donations for his own primary campaigns in 1992 and 1996. But he also helped the Democrats raise $123 million in soft money for the 1996 campaign and is committed to helping the party surpass that number this year.He has also raised untold millions of dollars for Democratic candidates for the House and Senate, for mayors and governors and candidates for state legislatures. He raised $10 million for the millennium celebration. The president's friends and supporters also donated $8 million to two of his legal defense funds.He was the host of more than 100 White House coffees in 1995 and 1996, each of which had a fund-raising goal of about $400,000. And he has tirelessly traversed the country in aid of virtually any Democrat willing to share a stage with him.''He went into Indiana and did an Evan Bayh dinner in 1996 and we raised $1 million,'' said Mr. Weiner, the treasurer of the governors' association. ''He'd show up at the Democratic Governors' Association and we'd raise $5 million.''And while Mr. Clinton says he does not relish the job of raising money, he offers no apologies for the aggressive way that he and Mr. McAuliffe have taken to the task.''Terry and I have never been of the school that believed that we ought to act embarrassed because we ask people in the system we have to contribute so that we could get our message across,'' Mr. Clinton said at a tribute to Mr. McAuliffe last June.Mr. McAuliffe sees Wednesday's gala as the crowning achievement of his and the president's fund-raising career and a fitting send-off for Mr. Clinton.''Who doesn't love it?'' Mr. McAuliffe said. ''This is a perfect ending.''
INTERNATIONALA3-9Barak Recalls Negotiators After Attack in West Bank  Prime Minister Ehud Barak recalled his peace negotiators from Sweden after a firebomb critically wounded a 2-year-old Israeli girl in a car passing through the Palestinian-ruled city of Jericho. Palestinian officials denounced Mr. Barak for pushing away from the peace table, saying it would lead to further deterioration and increased tensions.A1Yugoslavia Wary of Students  Otpor, a Serbian student movement demanding sweeping political change, is surging in popularity and is now a significant target for attack by the government of the Yugoslav president, Slobodan Milosevic.A6INTERNATIONALA3-9Barak Recalls Negotiators After Attack in West Bank  Prime Minister Ehud Barak recalled his peace negotiators from Sweden after a firebomb critically wounded a 2-year-old Israeli girl in a car passing through the Palestinian-ruled city of Jericho. Palestinian officials denounced Mr. Barak for pushing away from the peace table, saying it would lead to further deterioration and increased tensions.A1Yugoslavia Wary of Students  Otpor, a Serbian student movement demanding sweeping political change, is surging in popularity and is now a significant target for attack by the government of the Yugoslav president, Slobodan Milosevic.A6Agreement on Nuclear Arms  At the end of a monthlong conference of more than 185 nations at the United Nations, the five original atomic powers powers agreed for the first time to the elimination of nuclear arms. The move gives at least a psychological boost to flagging efforts to contain and abolish nuclear weapons.A8Swiss Move Closer to Union  Swiss voters, breaking with their tradition of isolationism, approved a set of agreements that lifts barriers to trade and commerce with the rest of Europe. The government hopes the accords are a step toward joining the European Union.A6Too Few Voters for Italy Reform  A referendum aimed at reducing the instability in Italy's electoral system was invalidated because only about 32 percent of voters cast ballots, far less than the 50.1 percent needed.A6Elections in Haiti  Haitians overcame fears of violence and crowded into polling places to elect thousands of legislators and local officials with the hope that their country would finally escape the political paralysis that has crippled it the past three years.A4Beijing's One-China Stipulation  Beijing restated that its ''one China'' principle is an absolute precondition of strengthening ties with Taiwan. The official New China News Agency issued the commentary in response to the inaugural speech by President Chen Shui-bian of Taiwan.A8NATIONALA10-17Clinton Draws 12,000 To Fund-Raising Event  President Clinton is to headline the most lucrative political fund-raising event in political history on Wednesday, collecting at least $25 million from 12,000 donors at the M.C.I. Center in Washington. The event will cement the president's legacy as the most prodigious political fund-raiser ever.A1Gore Ahead in Fund-Raising  Gov. George W. Bush of Texas raised three times more money than Vice President Al Gore last month, but Mr. Gore made up the difference with taxpayer funds and continued to have more money in the bank than his Republican opponent.A1419 Killed in Plane Crash  A charter plane carrying 19 people from Atlantic City, N.J., to Wilkes-Barre, Pa., apparently developed engine trouble and crashed, killing everyone aboard.A10Crowded Footbridge Collapses  A pedestrian bridge at Lowe's Motor Speedway in Concord, N.C., site of the Winston stock car race, snapped on Saturday night, injuring 107 people. Fifty-three remained hospitalized.A12Blast in Los Angeles  An explosion possibly caused by a large fireworks device tore through an apartment building in Los Angeles yesterday morning, injuring at least one resident. A man believed to be responsible for the explosion suffered injuries to his hands and face, but was not hospitalized. Several hundred people were evacuated from the building and the rest of the block.(AP)SCIENCE/HEALTHThalidomide Shows Promise  The early promise of thalidomide as an anti-cancer drug apparently is holding up, according to findings disclosed at the meeting of the American Society of Clinical Oncology in New Orleans.A15Asthma Data Lacking  Data from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention shows that most states have no system to track the number of people with asthma or monitor what happens to them, and only a few states have any recent reports on the illness in their jurisdictions.A12NEW YORK/REGIONB1-6Recruiting Success Favored Bishop Egan  Bishop Egan has vigorously recruited men for the priesthood, ordaining a higher proportion of priests than any other diocese in the Northeast. His success weighed heavily in his nomination to head the New York Archdiocese, said one church official involved in the process, a sign that the Vatican considers the shortage a serious problem.A1Giuliani Offers Sympathy  Mayor Giuliani, in an intensely personal interview broadcast on NBC's ''Meet the Press,'' said that he has ''sympathy, concern and compassion'' for the family of Patrick M. Dorismond, a Haitian-American man killed by the police in March.B4Offender Lists Go Online  States around the country are going a step beyond sex offender registries, posting that information, along with photographs and sordid details of crimes, on Web pages. Since 1996, 21 states, mostly in the South and the Midwest, have put the registries on the Internet.B1Lazio Campaigns for Senate  Representative Rick A. Lazio scrambled to present himself to voters in four cities in upstate New York as a viable statewide alternative to his opponent, Hillary Rodham Clinton.B1ARTSE1-8Danish Movie Wins at Cannes  The Danish director Lars von Trier's musical melodrama ''Dancer in the Dark'' won the Golden Palm for best movie at the Cannes International Film Festival awards ceremony.E3SPORTSMONDAYD1-10Knicks Head to Finals  The Knicks upset the Heat, 83-82, and advanced to the finals against Indiana.A1OBITUARIESB6-7Barbara Cartland  A romance writer whose outpouring of more than 700 novels during seven decades made her the undisputed queen of a genre for hundreds of millions of readers, she was 98.B7BUSINESS DAYC1-24Vodafone AirTouch Mulls Plan  Vodafone AirTouch is considering selling the fixed-line assets it acquired when it bought Mannesmann and speeding up the sale of Orange, a British Britain's third-largest cellular operator, to raise more than $60 billion, said executives close to the company.C10Copyright Law Update Sought  A Democratic research center is recommending that a law to protect intellectual property on the Internet be updated.C6Alteon Alliance Planned  Alteon intends to announce this week that it has enlisted two powerful allies -- Lucent Technologies and Akamai Technologies -- in a move to stay competitive after Cisco Systems agreed to acquire Arrowpoint.C11Busy Times for Optical Sector  The world of ''next generation optical networking'' is heating up. Mayan Networks, a start-up, plans today to announce the availability of its first product. And ONI Systems intends to make an initial public offering of its stock tomorrow.C11Stocks Plunge in Tokyo  Stocks were sharply lower in Tokyo today. In morning trading, the Nikkei index was down 540.02 points, or 3.2 percent.(Bloomberg News)Business DigestC1EDITORIALA18-19Editorials: Mr. Putin's missteps; a fast start by Mr. Lazio; taking on the N.R.A.Columns: William Safire, Bob Herbert.BridgeE6Public LivesA10CrosswordE8TV ListingsE7Metro DiaryB2WeatherB8
It had become a race about celebrity and personality: Hillary Rodham Clinton attacking Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani as harsh and temperamentally unsuited for a place in the United States Senate, and Mr. Giuliani portraying Mrs. Clinton as opportunistic and untrustworthy, unsuited to represent New Yorkers in Washington.But as Mrs. Clinton and her new opponent, Representative Rick A. Lazio of Suffolk County, set out across New York yesterday, laying out their divergent ideologies and themes, it was clear that the new candidate lineup had prompted the first lady, and to a lesser extent the Republicans, to retool their campaigns.It had become a race about celebrity and personality: Hillary Rodham Clinton attacking Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani as harsh and temperamentally unsuited for a place in the United States Senate, and Mr. Giuliani portraying Mrs. Clinton as opportunistic and untrustworthy, unsuited to represent New Yorkers in Washington.But as Mrs. Clinton and her new opponent, Representative Rick A. Lazio of Suffolk County, set out across New York yesterday, laying out their divergent ideologies and themes, it was clear that the new candidate lineup had prompted the first lady, and to a lesser extent the Republicans, to retool their campaigns.This has become a contest that is slightly less about who the participants are, and slightly more about what they stand for. And it is a development that appears to be welcomed by both sides.In the old lineup, Mrs. Clinton had sought to attack Mr. Giuliani on both his disposition and his ideology. But she kept returning to his jagged personality, in no small part because depicting the moderate mayor as too conservative was ''a stretch,'' as one of her advisers conceded yesterday with a sudden candor that surfaced with Mr. Giuliani's exit from the race.The situation has now flipped. Attacking the temperament of Mr. Lazio -- with his Boy Scout grin and telegenic good looks -- seems even more improbable than attacking Mr. Giuliani as hard-right conservative. But Mr. Lazio stands to the right of Mr. Giuliani, which means that Mrs. Clinton may now be able to draw on her ideological differences with Mr. Lazio that had proved so elusive with Mr. Giuliani.''We no longer have the hard-edged personality to pivot off,'' one of Mrs. Clinton's senior advisers said yesterday. ''Now we really are, in a large measure, in a campaign of issues. I think that issues and ideology are going to play more importantly going forward than personality.''Indeed, if Mr. Giuliani at times sought to resist Mrs. Clinton's attempt to draw ideological distinctions between them, Mr. Lazio seemed yesterday to be encouraging them, in the calculation that he would benefit from the contrast more than Mrs. Clinton would.At every turn, he belittled his new opponent as a liberal, reprising the playbook that Republicans have used in every state election in New York and throughout the country for the last 10 years.He even endorsed some Republican Congressional positions that Mr. Giuliani had shied away from over the last few months.To a certain extent, one of Mr. Lazio's advisers said, the new candidate, who won the formal endorsement of the state Republican chairman, William D. Powers, yesterday, will carry on with some of the more personality-driven attacks that Mr. Giuliani offered.In an interview on Saturday, for example, he described Mrs. Clinton as an opportunist, and he has repeatedly labeled her a carpetbagger, in a line of attack that his aides said would be central to his campaign.While a series of polls have suggested that the issue of Mrs. Clinton's new residency has receded in the minds of many New Yorkers, it is the kind of topic, one of Mr. Lazio's advisers said, that could help the Republicans paint Mrs. Clinton as ''not one of us,'' to use the shorthand favored by consultants.One Republican suggested that that could prove easier for the easygoing Mr. Lazio than for the hard-driven Mr. Giuliani.When Mr. Giuliani was the opponent, there was some disagreement among Mrs. Clinton's advisers about the extent to which they should go after the mayor's personality rather than his ideology, because the two held such similar views. The question now, one aide said, is determining how aggressively Mrs. Clinton should move to show Mr. Lazio as ideologically extreme.In particular, Mrs. Clinton's advisers were described as divided last night over whether they should quickly wheel out television advertisements attacking Mr. Lazio's positions in Congress, in particular his support for much of Newt Gingrich's Contract With America.To date, it has been Mrs. Clinton's surrogates (yesterday, it was her press secretary, Howard Wolfson, on ''Meet the Press'' on NBC) rather than the candidate who has carried out the attack, reflecting the concern among Mrs. Clinton's advisers that she remains too polarizing a figure to carry out the assaults herself.In truth, it was Mrs. Clinton's aides who first attacked Mr. Lazio, a point that Mr. Lazio made over the last two days.Still, Mrs. Clinton presented herself as something of the victim in an appearance in Albany.''I was a little disappointed yesterday,'' she said, ''that my latest opponent has already started hurling insults instead of offering ideas about what we can do to improve the lives of New Yorkers. I am sorry that my opponent couldn't even get through his announcement speech without going on the attack.''Mr. Giuliani was often cautious about embracing Republican positions on matters pending in Congress, because he viewed himself as a moderate on many issues and also because he suspected that reporters' inquiries had been encouraged by the first lady. Mr. Lazio showed no such reticence yesterday in a marathon series of television interviews.Mr. Lazio, for example, said he would accept the support of the Independence Party, even if Patrick J. Buchanan was its presidential candidate. Mr. Giuliani, aware of the dangers of letting himself be associated with Mr. Buchanan, had avoided making a commitment on that issue, despite Mrs. Clinton's best efforts to push him to do so.Mr. Lazio also attacked Mrs. Clinton's attempt to promote a national health care plan, describing it on ''Meet the Press'' as ''an abysmal disaster.'' Mrs. Clinton has repeatedly called for universal affordable health care. He also defended his support of much of Mr. Gingrich's Contract With America, in particular the balanced-budget amendment and welfare reform.''I'm for those things,'' Mr. Lazio said. ''I'm proudly for those things.''Mr. Lazio said he opposed handgun registration, which he described as ''invasive,'' in contrast to Mrs. Clinton, and supported a ''significant tax cut,'' though he stopped short of endorsing the one supported by his party's presumptive presidential nominee, Gov. George W. Bush of Texas. He also said he was open to allowing some private investments of Social Security funds.To some extent, in taking these positions, Mr. Lazio is simply expressing what is already on the record from his eight years in Congress. It is, Mr. Lazio suggested yesterday, an expression of his ideology and reflects his view of government and the world.The first lady's advisers had a different view, particularly after six months of trying to force Mr. Giuliani to take positions on many of these same issues. In that regard, Mrs. Clinton's aides, following Mr. Lazio's travels through the morning talk shows, were more than a little heartened by what they saw.
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani, who upon ending his campaign for the Senate intimated that he would work to improve his relationship with minority residents, said in an interview broadcast yesterday that he had ''sympathy, concern and compassion'' for the family of a Haitian-American man killed by the police in March.The mayor made the remarks on Saturday in an intensely personal interview with Tim Russert for broadcast yesterday on NBC's ''Meet the Press.'' Mr. Giuliani also said he had no regrets about his decision to drop out of the Senate race, given that he now realized that politics was ''not the most important thing in life.''Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani, who upon ending his campaign for the Senate intimated that he would work to improve his relationship with minority residents, said in an interview broadcast yesterday that he had ''sympathy, concern and compassion'' for the family of a Haitian-American man killed by the police in March.The mayor made the remarks on Saturday in an intensely personal interview with Tim Russert for broadcast yesterday on NBC's ''Meet the Press.'' Mr. Giuliani also said he had no regrets about his decision to drop out of the Senate race, given that he now realized that politics was ''not the most important thing in life.''The half-hour interview touched on a broad range of topics, from Mr. Giuliani's thoughts about his political future to his prostate cancer and what he acknowledged might have been bad advice his father once offered him, suggesting that it is more important to be respected than to be loved.''You know, fathers make mistakes and fathers are human beings, and I tend to think now that love is more important than I thought,'' the mayor said.Mr. Giuliani first acknowledged on Thursday that he did not respond properly to the fatal shooting in March of Patrick M. Dorismond, the Haitian-American man, by a plainclothes police officer who had tried to solicit marijuana from him. Mr. Dorismond, a security guard who was standing outside a Midtown bar, was unarmed and was not carrying drugs.The mayor said in the ''Meet the Press'' interview that he intended ''to find a way'' to let Mr. Dorismond's family know about his regrets, including possibly a visit with his parents. But the mayor again defended his decision on the day of Mr. Dorismond's shooting to release his juvenile arrest record.''What I should have done is to do a lot more to express sympathy, concern, help, assistance, compassion for a situation where, whether justified or unjustified, whatever it turns out, was still a tragic situation,'' the mayor said. ''I think that is where I made a mistake.''Mr. Giuliani also spoke at length with Mr. Russert about his desire, first expressed on Friday, to try to extend the benefits of New York City's current economic boom to more disaffected communities in the city. The mayor said he had not yet decided how he would do that, but he said he was committed to finding a way ''to break down the barriers that I've created'' as a result of his own sometimes abrasive personality.''There are people in the city who feel that they haven't been reached'' by the progress in the city in recent years, the mayor said. ''There are people that feel that I don't care about them, there are people who feel that I don't take them into equal consideration.''Outside predominantly black churches in Harlem and Queens yesterday, city residents said they would be watching the mayor to see if he lived up to his vows. Many said they were skeptical that the mayor, who has been criticized for increasing tension between the city authorities and New York's ethnic neighborhoods, would succeed.''You know, it is like a leopard changing his spots,'' said Douglas K. Henderson, 65, outside the Abyssinian Baptist Church in Harlem. ''It has got to be some sort of a miracle.''Many said they wanted to see him talk with black leaders like the Rev. Al Sharpton and visit in black neighborhoods, and then to act on what he has heard.''He needs to lend people of color an ear,'' said Sharon McClarty, 44, a computer technician from Jamaica, Queens. ''He has been talking, but he doesn't listen.''Andrea Summers, a mother of two who said she was cut from the welfare rolls as part of the mayor's workfare program, said the mayor needed to soften his harsh stance on welfare. She said she worked at two jobs but could not earn enough to pay the rising rents in Harlem.She dismissed the mayor's comments about breaking down barriers. ''He never comes to our parades, never comes meet the people,'' she said. ''He is never here.''As the mayor's remarks were televised yesterday, founders of the group 100 Blacks in Law Enforcement Who Care challenged him to compensate the Dorismond family by settling a lawsuit it has filed against the city.Attempts to reach Mr. Dorismond's parents, Marie and Andre Dorismond, through their lawyer, Johnnie L. Cochran Jr., were unsuccessful yesterday. But on Saturday, Andre Dorismond dismissed the mayor's recent offers of sympathy.  ''Now it doesn't make sense for him to apologize,'' he said. ''It's been two months since my son died. It's too late.''During the ''Meet the Press'' interview, the mayor, who said he was still struggling to decide on which  cancer treatment to choose, appeared relaxed, laughing and joking with Mr. Russert at times, even offering him one of his trademark Godfather impersonations.He called the decision to drop out of the Senate race the most difficult of his life, a choice he said he made entirely because of his cancer and not because of the controversy surrounding his relationship with an  East Side woman, Judith Nathan, and his decision earlier this month to separate from his wife.''But for the cancer and the timing of the cancer, I would have gone ahead and done it,'' Mr. Giuliani said.Mr. Giuliani, 55, who has 18 months left in office, deferred questions about his own political future, not indicating if he might make a run for governor or accept an appointment to the cabinet of George W. Bush, if Mr. Bush wins his bid for president.''I love politics,'' the mayor said. ''The thing I felt good about as I made the decision'' to leave the Senate race is: ''I finally figured out that politics in not my life. My life is about things that are closer to you and deeper than that.''And Mr. Giuliani said he had not yet decided what he would do with the approximately $9 million in unspent campaign contributions he had amassed, noting only that he intended to do as much as he could to support Representative Rick A. Lazio of Long Island.''I am going to try to do everything I can to help'' Mr. Lazio, the mayor said, ''if it is advertising, if it's an appearance, if it's figuring out how to make sure they're able to raise money.''
A picture caption on Wednesday about the graduation of Vice President's Al Gore's daughter Karenna Gore Schiff from Columbia Law School referred imprecisely to her degree. She is not the newest lawyer in her immediate family; she is the only one. While Mr. Gore's parents were both lawyers and he attended law school, he did not graduate.A picture caption on Wednesday about the graduation of Vice President's Al Gore's daughter Karenna Gore Schiff from Columbia Law School referred imprecisely to her degree. She is not the newest lawyer in her immediate family; she is the only one. While Mr. Gore's parents were both lawyers and he attended law school, he did not graduate.
This is so different from ''E.R.'' In fact, though ''The Tom Green Cancer Special'' takes place largely in a hospital, following its star as he is treated for testicular cancer, this stomach-churning, affecting, original special is different from anything that has ever been on television.The cult star of his own MTV series, in which his camera captures reactions to practical jokes that delight 15-year-olds, Mr. Green is just beginning to emerge as a mainstream personality. Last week on the ''Tonight'' show he put a squirming white mouse in his mouth, re-enacting a scene from his current movie, ''Road Trip,'' and horrifying Judge Judy, sitting next to him on the couch. With a wide-eyed gaze and a goatee, he looks both innocent and devilish, a style that perfectly expresses his personality.This is so different from ''E.R.'' In fact, though ''The Tom Green Cancer Special'' takes place largely in a hospital, following its star as he is treated for testicular cancer, this stomach-churning, affecting, original special is different from anything that has ever been on television.The cult star of his own MTV series, in which his camera captures reactions to practical jokes that delight 15-year-olds, Mr. Green is just beginning to emerge as a mainstream personality. Last week on the ''Tonight'' show he put a squirming white mouse in his mouth, re-enacting a scene from his current movie, ''Road Trip,'' and horrifying Judge Judy, sitting next to him on the couch. With a wide-eyed gaze and a goatee, he looks both innocent and devilish, a style that perfectly expresses his personality.However adolescent his humor, though, it can be serious and revealing as it shatters cultural assumptions. He turned a corner with his recent special in which he took Monica Lewinsky to Canada, where he grew up, ostensibly to buy fabric for her line of handbags. He took her to dinner with his parents, the beleaguered victims of so many of his pranks. The tone was poignant simply because he was nice to her, neither fawning nor rude. (Think of how different that attitude is.) Gradually, deeper resonances emerged: of course he was making fun of her, but they were both making more fun of the people who came out to gawk at her; and it was a bit sad to see how willing she was to go along.His ''Cancer Special'' is another breakthrough. It deserves its viewer's warning; the show is excruciating to sit though because it includes a long, unflinching look at the operation (no one except a surgeon should ever get that close to human intestines) and a visit to the pathology lab where we see the mashed-up testicle that had been removed in a previous operation. Yet beyond its shock value, the show is also a bizarre television landmark, willfully erasing all boundaries between narcissism and art, black humor and gross-out comedy, private and public lives, good taste and bad.''I was going to live this secret life with one testicle,'' he says here, explaining his reaction after the cancerous testicle was removed. When he needed a second operation to remove and test lymph nodes in his abdomen, he decided to take the cameras along. His special is the video generation's equivalent of the confessional memoir, a kind of public therapy in which self-revelation becomes a survival strategy.Mr. Green is so known for pranks that the immediate reaction to the news he had cancer was that he must be joking. The special is no joke. A large part was filmed at the University of Southern California, where he was treated. The chairman of the urology department explains that while testicular cancer accounts for only 1 to 2 percent of male cancers, it is the most common form among 15- to 35-year-old men. (Mr. Green is 28.)Such informative moments are not the point, though. The special is shaped by nervous laughter. Mr. Green recruits those closest to him and they gamely try to adopt his defensive, mocking attitude. He goes to dinner with his parents, his girlfriend Drew Barrymore and his two regular sidekicks from his show, Glenn Humplick and Phil Giroux. He gives the waitress an elaborate, uncomfortable explanation of his disease, and she replies, ''You want to see a wine list?''This particular kind of cancer gives him plenty of opportunities for jokes that would never make it on network television. Yet there are also moments that seem unintentionally touching. Being fitted for what he calls his burial suit (actually the suit he wore to the Oscars), he asks for ''a last picture of me alive with my mother, in a nice suit.''''Tom, you're going to live,'' his mother says, sweetly and as cheerfully as she can, kissing him on the cheek. ''What did the doctor tell you today? He said, 'Tom, you're going to be fine.' ''He looks close to tears, though he recovers by saying, ''You're wrinkling my suit, Mom.''In the hospital he asks the doctor, ''Is it possible I'm going to wake up screaming?''Seeing the operation is the price viewers pay for the rest of the special. Even Mr. Green says, with his deadpan delivery, ''I was kind of hoping it would have been funnier inside my body.''After that, there are some genuinely funny moments, including a singalong ditty about the value of self-examination, complete with lyrics on screen and a bouncing testicle over the words.Appearing to a cheering crowd at the University of Florida, he has turned his terrifying experience into comedy, helped by the fact that the doctors found no trace of cancer during the second operation. Still, he ends the special by saying, ''Hopefully, my cancer won't come back and I won't die.'' Performers are rarely so chilling, blunt or honest.FRONTLINE  The Battle Over School Choice  PBS, tonight  (Channel 13, New York, at 10)To flip back and forth between the taboo-shattering Tom Green and the staid ''Frontline'' would be to invite an extreme case of cultural whiplash. Despite its eye-glazing title, though, ''The Battle Over School Choice'' turns out to be a smooth, humanizing primer on an issue that is both central to the presidential campaign and deadly dull in the abstract. The main subject is vouchers, with which the government pays for students to attend private schools.Focusing on Cleveland, the evenhanded special presents voucher students whose futures have been salvaged by the opportunity, as well as others who attended a school whose founders absconded with the government's money. There are interviews with Vice President Al Gore, who opposes vouchers, and Gov. George W. Bush, who supports them, but the documentary makes the point that there is less difference between the candidates' views than their ads contend. (And really, who is against higher standards and better education?)The failure of this otherwise lucid, engaging documentary is in its modest ambition: it offers only glancing references to a profound, underlying issue it is easier to ignore: how much the battle over school choice is really about race and class.TELEVISION REVIEW
Vice President Al Gore voiced perfunctory support today for the China trade agreement, reading a statement in front of a labor group that opposes the China bill and is rallying in Washington against it.Mr. Gore's appearance before about 175 members of the United Food and Commercial Workers was preceded by a videotape of his acceptance speech last fall after winning the endorsement of the A.F.L.-C.I.O. He began his speech today by mentioning a few of the issues on which they agreed, like raising the minimum wage, instituting new standards for workplace safety and passing a patients' bill of rights.Vice President Al Gore voiced perfunctory support today for the China trade agreement, reading a statement in front of a labor group that opposes the China bill and is rallying in Washington against it.Mr. Gore's appearance before about 175 members of the United Food and Commercial Workers was preceded by a videotape of his acceptance speech last fall after winning the endorsement of the A.F.L.-C.I.O. He began his speech today by mentioning a few of the issues on which they agreed, like raising the minimum wage, instituting new standards for workplace safety and passing a patients' bill of rights.''On all these issues and on many many more, some of which I'm going to discuss here today, we agree,'' Mr. Gore said. ''But in candor, I do have to begin here by saying something about an issue where we differ.''I know that one of your legislative priorities is to urge members of Congress not to support permanent normal trade relations with China,'' he went on, referring to the vote scheduled for Wednesday. ''I respect your view. You know that I do not share that view. I strongly support normal trade relations with China, because I believe it is right for America's economy and right for the cause of reform in China,'' he said.After another sentence or two, he eased back into the many points of agreement between himself and labor, and the audience appeared to be as forgiving of his pro-China position as they were relieved that he did not make much of an issue of it. Still, the food workers union, which represents numerous service workers, has less at stake in the trade issue than the industrial unions have.The workers gave him a standing ovation when he pledged to ban the use of permanent striker replacements and applauded him at several other points.''We're not naive,'' David Mertz, 32, a political worker for the Retail, Wholesale and Department Store Union, which is affiliated with the food workers, said after the speech. ''But on the vast majority of issues, we'll stand with him and he'll stand with us.''Labor's endorsement of Mr. Gore and opposition to the China bill has tied one hand behind Mr. Gore's back as he has stood with the Clinton administration on urging passage of the bill.Still, the degree to which he has pressed for passage is unclear. He did attend and speak at a White House pep rally on the bill recently, but his comments were overshadowed by those of former presidents and other notables. He has said that he has personally lobbied some members of Congress, but he would not name them.The Republicans have been quick to say that Mr. Gore's support has been tepid, and Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, his Republican rival, has suggested that he has been more enthused about the matter than has Mr. Clinton's own vice president.''So far, Al Gore has only paid lip service to his position'' on permanent normal trade relations for China, Mindy Tucker, a spokeswoman for Mr. Bush, said in a statement today. ''He may offer tepid support for China P.N.T.R. in a room full of former secretaries of state and ambassadors, but before union audiences, his support disappears.''But others, like George Becker, president of the United Steelworkers of America, have said that Mr. Gore has been lobbying hard for the measure and would suffer for that in November because labor would not work hard for him.''We are not going to be forgiving on this,'' Mr. Becker said earlier this month.Two of the biggest unions in the labor federation -- the Teamsters and the United Auto Workers -- withheld their endorsements of the vice president because of the China deal.Mr. Gore began his day with breakfast with Thabo Mbeki, president of South Africa, and concluded his evening by attending a state dinner at the White House for him.But Gore aides were circumspect about their discussions. Mr. Gore has come under continuing protest from AIDS activists -- as recently as last week -- for administration policy that had the effect of blocking cheaper anti-AIDS drugs to South Africa.A Gore spokesman said today only that Mr. Gore and Mr. Mbeki discussed the matter of AIDS in Africa. An administration official said Mr. Mbeki discussed the matter with President Clinton but was uncertain of Mr. Gore's involvement.
Gov. George W. Bush today accused the Clinton administration of taking sides in last year's Israeli election and of trying to make Israel conform to American ''plans and timetables'' for peace. The governor said his own support for Israel was ''not conditional on the outcome of the peace process.''Mr. Bush leveled his criticisms in a speech on the Middle East at the annual policy conference of the American Israel Public Affairs Committee, a pro-Israel lobbying group. His appearance was part of a sustained effort in recent days to address what many consider to be his chief vulnerability as a presidential candidate: his command of foreign affairs.Gov. George W. Bush today accused the Clinton administration of taking sides in last year's Israeli election and of trying to make Israel conform to American ''plans and timetables'' for peace. The governor said his own support for Israel was ''not conditional on the outcome of the peace process.''Mr. Bush leveled his criticisms in a speech on the Middle East at the annual policy conference of the American Israel Public Affairs Committee, a pro-Israel lobbying group. His appearance was part of a sustained effort in recent days to address what many consider to be his chief vulnerability as a presidential candidate: his command of foreign affairs.Mr. Bush, who was repeatedly interrupted by applause, said little on the Middle East that he had not said before. Once again, he pledged that as president he would ''begin the process of moving the U.S. ambassador to the city Israel has chosen as its capital,'' a reference to Jerusalem.His most pointed remarks concerned the administration's role in Middle East peace talks over the years.''In recent times Washington has tried to make Israel conform to its own plans and timetables,'' he said, drawing applause, ''but this is not the path to peace.''''A clear and bad example,'' he said, ''was the administration's attempt to take sides in the most recent Israeli election. America should not interfere in Israel's democratic process, and America will not interfere in Israeli elections when I'm the president.''Mr. Bush did not elaborate. Aides said his comments about a timetable referred to the nine days and nights of tortuous Wye River negotiations on Maryland's Eastern Shore, which committed the Israelis and Palestinians to actions they had promised in previous agreements. The talks restored momentum to the peace process, setting a detailed timetable for Israel's withdrawal from part of the West Bank in three phases.Although some Republicans praised the agreement, others said Israel was being unduly pressured.Responding to the accusation of playing favorites in the election, Chris Lehane, a spokesman for Mr. Gore, called it ''irresponsible to make such reckless comments concerning such a sensitive part of the world'' and said ''it really does raise a question of his readiness to be a leader in international affairs.''Mr. Lehane said, ''Al Gore's leadership credentials on facilitating the Middle East peace process are impeccable while Bush is suffering from an antiquated analysis reminiscent of the Republican approach of the 1980's.''Although the Clinton administration maintained studied public neutrality in last year's Israeli elections, it made little effort to conceal its desire for Ehud Barak's victory over then-Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu. James Carville, President Clinton's former political adviser, served in a similar role for Mr. Barak. In 1996, Mr. Clinton all but openly endorsed Shimon Peres, the Labor Party candidate, over Mr. Netanyahu because of the difference in the candidates' views of the peace process.In appearances before Jewish groups, presidential candidates frequently promise to move the United States Embassy in Israel to Jerusalem from Tel Aviv. The status of Jerusalem, which Israel regards as its capital, is a central issue in ''final status'' peace negotiations between Israelis and Palestinians, and the administration says moving the embassy would pre-empt the delicate negotiations and destroy Washington's ability to act as an honest broker in peace talks.In his failed presidential bid in 1988, Mr. Gore said he would consider moving the embassy to Jerusalem, but his aides now say he sees the issue as something that should be worked out in peace negotiations.Prime Minister Barak was supposed to attend the American Israel Public Affairs Committee conference today and meet with both Mr. Bush and Mr. Gore. But over the weekend he canceled his visit to the United States because of violence in the West Bank and South Lebanon.Mr. Bush said he was ''deeply disturbed'' by the reports of the Palestinian police opening fire on Israeli soldiers last week.''This is certainly no way to make peace a reality,'' he said.Mr. Bush also said that Iran's leaders should be put on notice that ''America will judge them'' by the treatment of 13 Jews imprisoned in Iran on charges of espionage.Little more than a year ago, Mr. Bush came under criticism for silence on the West's air war in Kosovo. And more than a few critics have questioned how capable he would be, as president, on foreign policy issues. In the Republican primaries, his main opponent, Senator John McCain of Arizona, repeatedly said that he himself would not need ''on-the-job training,'' a way of belittling Mr. Bush's credentials to be commander in chief.Mr. Bush has openly acknowledged that he is studying international issues, telling reporters that he is reading ''Lenin's Tomb,'' a book about the Soviet Union by David Remnick, and ''Balkan Ghosts,'' an account of turmoil in the Balkans by Robert D. Kaplan.In recent days, Mr. Bush has been raising his profile on international affairs. Last week he took positions on pending Congressional disputes on financing for Kosovo peace-keeping and on trade with China.He plans to speak further on national security at a Washington news conference on Tuesday and to meet with the South African president, Thabo Mbeki, in Austin, Tex., later this week.Mr. Mbeki met with Mr. Gore today before attending a State dinner with Mr. Clinton.Introducing Mr. Bush today, Mayer Mitchell, a former president of the public affairs committee, told the audience that if they did not know Mr. Bush well, they did know the foreign policy advisers surrounding him. Mr. Mitchell named a host of former aides to Presidents Ronald Reagan and George Bush.In a separate appearance here today before the National Association of Realtors, Mr. Bush called for a crackdown on ''frivolous and junk lawsuits'' and said lawyers who filed multiple ''junk lawsuits'' should be barred from appearing in federal court for three years.And he ended the day with a fund-raiser that was expected to bring in $350,000 to $400,000 for his campaign.In His Own Words: GEORGE W. BUSHRemarks yesterday in Washington to the American Israeli Public Affairs Committee:''I am deeply disturbed by the violence that continues in the West Bank and in South Lebanon.  And especially by reports of Palestinian police opening fire on Israeli soldiers last week. This is no way to make peace a reality. We have seen Israel's desire for peace, and what can be accomplished when moderate Arab states respond in kind. . . . In recent times, Washington has tried to make Israel conform to its own plans and timetables. But this is not the path to peace. A clear and bad example was the administration's attempt to take sides in the most recent Israeli election. America should not interfere in Israel's democratic process, and America will not interfere in Israeli elections when I'm president.But something will happen when I'm president: as soon as I take office I will begin the process of moving the U.S. ambassador to the city Israel has chosen as its capital.''
THE REPUBLICANSKEYES FIRM ON ABORTION  The abortion issue continues to present potential problems for the Republican Party, with Alan Keyes, a presidential candidate, considering leaving the party if it weakens its stance against abortion. Connie Hair, Mr. Keyes's press secretary, says he will possibly join the Constitution Party and seek its nomination if the Republicans do not retain a strong anti-abortion position in their platform or if Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, the presumed Republican presidential nominee, picks a running mate who is not anti-abortion. The Constitution Party is strongly anti-abortion. Ms. Hair made her comments to USA Today over the weekend, then elaborated on them yesterday. Mr. Keyes has not been heard from much lately. But Ms. Hair emphasized that while Mr. Keyes reserved the right to abandon the Republican Party over the abortion issue, he was for the moment still a candidate for the Republican nomination, had delegates pledged to him and intended to attend the party convention in Philadelphia. The Constitution Party already has a presidential candidate, Howard Phillips, who said yesterday, ''I am prepared to discuss anything with Alan Keyes, including the possibility of his becoming our candidate for president or vice president, but my present intention is to continue as the presidential nominee.''Irvin Molotsky (NYT)THE REPUBLICANSKEYES FIRM ON ABORTION  The abortion issue continues to present potential problems for the Republican Party, with Alan Keyes, a presidential candidate, considering leaving the party if it weakens its stance against abortion. Connie Hair, Mr. Keyes's press secretary, says he will possibly join the Constitution Party and seek its nomination if the Republicans do not retain a strong anti-abortion position in their platform or if Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, the presumed Republican presidential nominee, picks a running mate who is not anti-abortion. The Constitution Party is strongly anti-abortion. Ms. Hair made her comments to USA Today over the weekend, then elaborated on them yesterday. Mr. Keyes has not been heard from much lately. But Ms. Hair emphasized that while Mr. Keyes reserved the right to abandon the Republican Party over the abortion issue, he was for the moment still a candidate for the Republican nomination, had delegates pledged to him and intended to attend the party convention in Philadelphia. The Constitution Party already has a presidential candidate, Howard Phillips, who said yesterday, ''I am prepared to discuss anything with Alan Keyes, including the possibility of his becoming our candidate for president or vice president, but my present intention is to continue as the presidential nominee.''Irvin Molotsky (NYT)THE GREENSNADER PRO-IMPEACHMENT  Ralph Nader, the probable Green Party candidate for president, said yesterday that if he had been in the Senate during the impeachment trial of President Clinton, he would have voted to convict. ''I thought that he crossed that boundary so seriously in that scandal that the House was proper in impeaching him and the Senate really should have convicted him,'' Mr. Nader said on Political Points, the Webcast of The New York Times and ABC News. ''I think law licenses have been taken away from lawyers for less egregious offenses than what President Clinton committed as president of the United States.'' While the remark might please some disaffected Democrats and independent voters, it could also anger some of the liberals Mr. Nader has been courting in states like California, where a recent poll shows him pulling just under 10 percent of the vote.James Dao (NYT)THE STATESUP FOR GRABS  Smelling vulnerability in the Republican incumbent, four Arkansas Democrats each hope to be selected in today's primary to be the challenger in the state's traditionally Democratic Fourth Congressional District. Representative Jay Dickey has represented the district, which is about a quarter black, since 1992, but polls have shown he is faltering, particularly after a remark he made in January suggesting that he could not help a group of black farmers unless they contributed money. The leading Democrat in today's primary, State Senator Mike Ross, is the only one of the group that outranked Mr. Dickey in a recent poll by The Arkansas Democrat-Gazette. The poll showed Mr. Ross leading his nearest competitor, former State Representative Judy Smith, by 21 points.David Firestone (NYT)THE SENATEKENNEDY CHALLENGER REBOUNDS  A Republican who plans to challenge Senator Edward M. Kennedy, Democrat of Massachusetts, in the November election appeared to cross a crucial threshold today, gaining the 10,000 signatures he needed to get his name on the ballot. The Republican, Jack E. Robinson, turned in at least 10,073 certified signatures to city and town clerks, Secretary of State William Galvin said. Mr. Galvin said it was not certain that Mr. Robinson would appear on the ballot because some of the signatures could be disqualified. Mr. Robinson, whose campaign has been plagued by problems, said the latest development vindicated his faith in the face of  naysayers who predicted he would not break the 10,000 mark. ''We knew we would pull it off,'' he said.(AP)
INTERNATIONALA3-14Hezbollah Advances As Israeli Zone Collapses  The center of Israel's buffer zone in southern Lebanon collapsed as Israeli-backed Lebanese militias abandoned villages, command posts and arms to advancing guerrillas, and the Israeli Army early today hurriedly evacuated a major Lebanese base. The rout followed the start of a quiet withdrawal of Israeli forces in advance of a July 7 deadline set by Prime Minister Ehud Barak.A1INTERNATIONALA3-14Hezbollah Advances As Israeli Zone Collapses  The center of Israel's buffer zone in southern Lebanon collapsed as Israeli-backed Lebanese militias abandoned villages, command posts and arms to advancing guerrillas, and the Israeli Army early today hurriedly evacuated a major Lebanese base. The rout followed the start of a quiet withdrawal of Israeli forces in advance of a July 7 deadline set by Prime Minister Ehud Barak.A1Gov. George W. Bush accused the Clinton administration of taking sides in last year's Israeli election and of pressing Israel to meet American ''plans and timetables.''A19Women and the Western Wall  The Israeli Supreme Court changed the rules of worship at the Western Wall, ruling that women may hold group services, wear prayer shawls and read aloud from Torah scrolls at Judaism's most revered shrine.A6Maneuvering on China Trade  Administration officials said they still needed six to eight undecided Democrats and a similar number of uncommitted Republicans to vote their way if the China trade bill is to pass the House, where a vote is set for tomorrow.A1Vice President Al Gore expressed perfunctory support for the China trade agreement, reading a statement in front of a labor group that opposes the China bill.A19In Defense of Globalization  Secretary General Kofi Annan, hoping to dissuade demonstrations against a United Nations millennium assembly in September, told independent groups that the solution to global inequalities was not confrontation but cooperation.A12More U.N. Peacekeepers Freed  The United Nations said nearly half the 500 peacekeepers seized in Sierra Leone this month had been released. But the rebels have been calling for the release of their leader, Foday Sankoh, raising concerns that they may hold on to hostages .A12Haitian Election in Question  The results of an undetermined number of legislative races from voting on Sunday may have to be voided because ballots were either damaged, lost or left susceptible to fraud when tired and poorly trained poll workers dumped huge piles of ballot boxes outside electoral offices.A3World BriefingA8NATIONALA16-23Court Voids Law Limiting Sex Channels on Cable TV  The Supreme Court, voting 5 to 4, struck down a federal law that required many cable systems to limit sexually explicit channels to late-night hours. Both sides agreed that shielding children from sexually explicit material, the purpose of the law, was a legitimate goal but differed on the extent of the problem and on the degree of constitutional ''flexibility'' that is allowed.A1In rulings on arson and fraud cases, the court stepped back from a continuing confrontation with Congress over limits on federal authority.A22The justices agreed to hear a clean-air case that casts a constitutional shadow over the ability of federal agencies to administer programs within broad grants of authority from Congress.A22Disbarment Is Recommended  A disciplinary committee in Arkansas recommended that President Clinton be disbarred for ''serious misconduct'' -- his false testimony about his relationship with Monica S. Lewinsky -- in the Paula Jones sexual harassment case. A judge must approve it, and the president can appeal to the state's Supreme Court.A1General Loses Appointment  The Army has rescinded the appointment of Maj. Gen. Larry G. Smith as the Army's deputy inspector general in the wake of accusations by the Army's highest-ranking woman, Lt. Gen. Claudia J. Kennedy, that he made an unwanted sexual advance toward her in 1996, officials said.A1Doctors vs. Big Drug Maker  Hundreds of doctors have been boycotting drug products made by Merck in a political fight over the collective bargaining rights of doctors, pharmacists and other health care professionals.A1Complicating Crash Inquiry  The cockpit voice recorder was not working in the twin-engine turboprop that crashed near Scranton, Pa., on Sunday and apparently never worked, because it was the wrong model for that airplane, the National Transportation Safety Board said. And the plane did not carry a flight data recorder, the other kind of ''black box.'' All 19 people aboard were killed.A14NEW YORK/REGIONB1-9Speaker Silver Survives A Revolt in the Assembly  Democrats engaged in a rare public struggle over the future of their leader, Speaker Sheldon Silver, who with his allies held off a coup attempt.B1Conservatives Back Lazio  The Republicans' new Senate candidate, Representative Rick A. Lazio, received the backing of the state's Conservative Party, which could deliver as many as 300,000 votes.B5Tour Bus Kills Actor  Randolph Walker, 71, who was known for dozens of off-Broadway roles, was struck by a double-decker bus on West 45th Street.B1EDUCATIONNew Vision for CUNY  Trustees approved a plan calling for elite colleges and research groups, higher standards for admission and graduation and possibly a core curriculum across campuses.B1Harvard President Leaving  Neil L. Rudenstine, 65, said he would step down next spring.A14SCIENCE TIMESF1-14Easing Hot Flashes  A researcher said hot flashes among women with breast cancer were quickly eased in frequency and severity by relatively small amounts of antidepressant drugs.A23Health & FitnessF7FASHIONB12ARTSE1-10Lincoln Center Jazz Complex  Jazz at Lincoln Center will present plans today for its new home, including what are billed as the world's first concert halls built for jazz.E1OBITUARIESB10-11Sir John Gielgud  One of the great actors of the English stage, who enthralled audiences for more than 70 years, he was 96.A1BUSINESS DAYC1-28Industrial Espionage Case  A federal indictment accuses Jose Ignacio Lopez de Arriortua, a former senior executive at General Motors, of defrauding the automaker by taking boxes of its confidential documents with him when he moved to a top job at Volkswagen in 1993.C1Taking Literary Market Online  Time Warner Trade Publishing is expected to announce today the creation of a separate online publishing venture. And Microsoft is teaming up with Simon & Schuster and Random House for online publishing.C1Consumer Privacy on the Net  Clinton administration officials disagreed with the F.T.C on what the commission's chairman said was a need for legislation to protect consumer privacy on the Internet.C1Business DigestC1SPORTSD1-8Devils Hang On  The Devils beat Philadelphia, 4-1, to avoid elimination.D1Portland Evens SeriesThe Trail Blazers evened their best-of-seven series with the Los Angeles Lakers, 106-77.D3EDITORIALA24-25Editorials: Israel's volatile border; the lesson for the speaker; cable shows and free speech; new rhetoric at City Hall.  Columns: Thomas L. Friedman.CrosswordE8  TV ListingsE9  Public LivesB2  WeatherD8
E. Scott Garrett was a little-known Republican state assemblyman until two years ago when his primary challenge nearly unseated Representative Marge Roukema, the incumbent in New Jersey's Fifth Congressional District.Now Mr. Garrett is taking on Mrs. Roukema again, and this time he has brought some friends to the fight. The Club for Growth, an organization of wealthy Republican conservatives who loathe Mrs. Roukema's moderate stand on abortion, welfare reform and tax issues, are piling money into Mr. Garrett's campaign for the June 6 primary, making the fight for the Fifth District into a national test of party conservatives' ability to purge Congress of Republicans they consider too liberal.E. Scott Garrett was a little-known Republican state assemblyman until two years ago when his primary challenge nearly unseated Representative Marge Roukema, the incumbent in New Jersey's Fifth Congressional District.Now Mr. Garrett is taking on Mrs. Roukema again, and this time he has brought some friends to the fight. The Club for Growth, an organization of wealthy Republican conservatives who loathe Mrs. Roukema's moderate stand on abortion, welfare reform and tax issues, are piling money into Mr. Garrett's campaign for the June 6 primary, making the fight for the Fifth District into a national test of party conservatives' ability to purge Congress of Republicans they consider too liberal.By Primary Day, Mr. Garrett will have received about $150,000 in direct donations, and the Club for Growth will provide ''a couple hundred thousand'' in soft money contributions, said Stephen Moore, president of the group. The money, Mr. Moore said, is intended to send a message to other Republican moderates in Congress.''I look at this as a really big race for the conservative movement,'' Mr. Moore said. ''Next to the presidential race, this could be the second most important race, because if Roukema loses, or I should say, if Garrett wins, it would send shock waves through Congress. All 25 or so liberal Republican members are watching this, and they will be terrified if Garrett wins this race.''The Fifth District, reaching across northern New Jersey like an inverted V along the angle formed by the Delaware River and the New York line, takes in all of Warren County and parts of Bergen, Passaic and Sussex Counties. Mr. Garrett, 40, of Wantage, has represented Sussex, Hunterdon and Warren Counties in the State Assembly since 1990, in an Assembly district that includes most of the Congressional district's rural but rapidly suburbanizing western reaches. He is sharply anti-abortion and a supporter of the flat tax movement, a position that helped win an endorsement from Steve Forbes, the former presidential contender. But he has made the incumbent his main issue, accusing her of acting too much like a Democrat.''When Hillary Clinton failed to get her giant health bill through, she said, 'Maybe we can do it incrementally,' '' Mr. Garrett said in an interview. ''That is what moderates like the incumbent in this district have been doing: pushing incrementally on all the things the Democrats could not do all at once.''Mrs. Roukema, 70, of Ridgewood, has held her seat for 20 years and is strongest in the more populous Bergen County portion of the district. Her politics reflect the moderate suburban Republican outlook of much of northern Bergen's commuter population: she is for abortion rights, she resisted some of the harsher aspects of welfare reform, and she sponsored the Family and Medical Leave Act that President Bush vetoed and President Clinton signed. Mrs. Roukema has won middle-of-the-road scores from Congressional watchdog groups on taxation and spending issues, and she reminds her constituents that she is next in line for the chairmanship of the House Banking Committee, if she wins re-election and the Republicans retain control of Congress.''He's not a conservative, he's extreme right wing,'' Mrs. Roukema said of Mr. Garrett in an interview. Her supporters maintain that Mr. Garrett is too conservative for the district, and that a win by him in the primary would tip the district to the Democrat, Linda Mercurio, who has no primary opponent.Yet the Fifth is one of only two New Jersey Congressional districts that supported Bob Dole in 1996, a fact that Mr. Garrett cites to back his view that the district is ready for a more conservative Republican.The Club for Growth's polls show Mrs. Roukema ahead of Mr. Garrett, Mr. Moore said, but Mr. Garrett is using the money he has raised to get out the vote in Passaic, Sussex and Warren Counties, which are growing quickly as families move from suburbs closer to New York City. He won all three outlying counties in his race against Mrs. Roukema in 1998, and he is hardly alone in thinking that, as those families move west, they also move to the right politically.''We have a lot of people moving here from the inner city in Bergen County,'' said Don R. Kelley, the Warren County sheriff and a leading Republican, displaying a rural view of the suburbs to the east. ''And they move out here for our conservative values in the schools and in our whole atmosphere.''Mrs. Roukema dismisses Mr. Garrett's strong showing in the 1998 primary as a combination of flukes. He drew heavily from single-issue voters concerned with abortion and gun control in a low-turnout primary, she said, and he benefited from a lackadaisical attitude among her own supporters in Bergen County.''My supporters said, 'Oh, Marge always has these primaries and she always wins,' '' the congresswoman said. ''This time, we are going to make sure they get out and vote.'' Turnout is likely to be higher than the 30,000 votes counted in 1998 because of the race for New Jersey's open United States Senate seat.Mrs. Roukema has the support of her party's Congressional leadership and the endorsements of the party chairman of every county touched by her district. She has a very strong  base in the party leadership in the  district, and has raised nearly $500,000 so far.Correction:  May 24, 2000, Wednesday  An article yesterday about the Republican primary in New Jersey for the Fifth District seat held by Representative Marge Roukema omitted clarification for an imprecise reference by her opponent, E. Scott Garrett. His comment read, ''When Hillary Clinton failed to get her giant health bill through, she said, 'Maybe we can do it incrementally.' '' By ''she,'' Mr. Garrett meant Mrs. Clinton -- not Mrs. Roukema, who opposed the Clinton plan.Correction:  June 9, 2000, Friday  An article on May 23 about the Republican primary in New Jersey for the seat held by Representative Marge S. Roukema misstated the criticism leveled at her by the Club for Growth, a conservative group based in Washington. (The error was repeated in an article in some copies on Wednesday.) While the organization has objected to Mrs. Roukema's moderate stands on welfare reform and tax issues, it has not criticized her for supporting abortion rights; it takes no position on social issues.Correction: May 24, 2000, WednesdayAn article yesterday about the Republican primary in New Jersey for the Fifth District seat held by Representative Marge Roukema omitted clarification for an imprecise reference by her opponent, E. Scott Garrett. His comment read, ''When Hillary Clinton failed to get her giant health bill through, she said, 'Maybe we can do it incrementally.' '' By ''she,'' Mr. Garrett meant Mrs. Clinton -- not Mrs. Roukema, who opposed the Clinton plan.<br><br>Correction: June 9, 2000, FridayAn article on May 23 about the Republican primary in New Jersey for the seat held by Representative Marge S. Roukema misstated the criticism leveled at her by the Club for Growth, a conservative group based in Washington. (The error was repeated in an article in some copies on Wednesday.) While the organization has objected to Mrs. Roukema's moderate stands on welfare reform and tax issues, it has not criticized her for supporting abortion rights; it takes no position on social issues.<br><br>
Charlton Heston was unanimously re-elected yesterday to an unprecedented third term as president of the National Rifle Association, the nation's largest gun group. He pledged to do all possible to defeat Vice President Al Gore, a gun control advocate, in this fall's presidential contest and hinted that he might run again next year for a fourth term.Charlton Heston was unanimously re-elected yesterday to an unprecedented third term as president of the National Rifle Association, the nation's largest gun group. He pledged to do all possible to defeat Vice President Al Gore, a gun control advocate, in this fall's presidential contest and hinted that he might run again next year for a fourth term.The re-election of Mr. Heston was the last big item of business at the organization's 129th annual convention in Charlotte, N.C.
Craig Grebeck has the role of a utility player all figured out.Grebeck hit a game-winning single in the ninth inning yesterday as the Toronto Blue Jays beat the visiting Chicago White Sox, 4-3, to stop a four-game losing streak.The 5-foot-7-inch utility player went 3-for-5 with two runs batted in, playing in place of Homer Bush, who is in an 0-for-11 skid.Craig Grebeck has the role of a utility player all figured out.Grebeck hit a game-winning single in the ninth inning yesterday as the Toronto Blue Jays beat the visiting Chicago White Sox, 4-3, to stop a four-game losing streak.The 5-foot-7-inch utility player went 3-for-5 with two runs batted in, playing in place of Homer Bush, who is in an 0-for-11 skid.''I know my role,'' said Grebeck, who is hitting .383 in 47 at-bats. ''A lot of teams have utility players, but they don't have a true utility player. The key in doing this job is working. You have to practice like you're playing, and if you do that you'll be OK.''Chicago overcame a 3-1 deficit in the ninth on a two-out single by Jeff Abbott off Billy Koch (3-0) on a 3-2 pitch and Herbert Perry's second home run of the season, an opposite-field shot to right.But Bob Howry (0-1) walked the pinch-hitter Darrin Fletcher with one out in the bottom half, Shannon Stewart hit a ground-rule double and Grebeck grounded a single under the glove of shortstop Jose Valentin, who was playing in.Toronto Manager Jim Fregosi knows he can count on Grebeck being ready when he is called upon.''Craig knows what his job is, and he keeps himself ready to play,'' Fregosi said. ''That's what experience on the bench means.''Toronto's Pete Munro, making his first start of the season, did not allow a hit until Chris Singleton doubled with two outs in the fourth and gave up just four hits and one run in seven and one-third innings. Valentin's run-scoring single tied the game, 1-1, in the fifth.Grebeck's solo homer off Jim Parque put Toronto ahead in the fourth.VISIT TO THE RAWLINGS FACTORY: A day after a record six grand slams and 56 home runs were hit in the majors, a van full of baseball executives showed up at the Rawlings factory in Turrialba, Costa Rica, yesterday for a long-scheduled look at how big league baseballs are made.Their conclusion: It's not the balls' fault.''We came away very impressed with the operations here,'' Sandy Alderson, the majors' executive vice president for operations, said after a two-and-a-half-hour tour of the plant where all major and minor league baseballs are made.With Rawlings balls flying out of major league parks at a record-setting pace, Alderson said he took a tour of the factory to get more familiar with what goes into making a baseball.Alderson said he thought stronger hitters, smaller ballparks and a pitching talent pool thinned somewhat by expansion all contributed to 2000's homer-happy season.AMERICAN LEAGUE: YESTERDAY
BUSH-Julian S. 84. A retired Senior Estate Partner with the former Shea and Gould Law Firm in New York, died Tuesday, May 16 in Charleston, South Carolina. Mr. Bush was born in New York City, the son of Joachim F. Bush and Isabel Rosenthall Bush. He was an army veteran of W.W.II. He was a graduate of Columbia Law School and an Adjunct Professor of Law in Estate Planning at Columbia, 1958-1981 and formerly Adjunct Professor of Law in Taxation at NYU, 1981-1987. He was the author of numerous articles and texts. In his later years, he was a member of the Charleston Tax Council and Estate Planning Council. He was a Founder and Director of The Annual Estate Planning Institute at the Medical University of South Carolina. He was a member of the Charleston Symphony Orchestra's Board of Directors and a member of MUSC's President's Advisory Council on Planned Giving. He was a member of the Society of American Magicians. Surviving are his wife, Bette Bain Roe Bush; two daughters, Dorothy B. Seuter of New York and Kathryn D. Rucker of Connecticutt; 4 grandchildren and a great-grandchild.BUSH-Julian S. 84. A retired Senior Estate Partner with the former Shea and Gould Law Firm in New York, died Tuesday, May 16 in Charleston, South Carolina. Mr. Bush was born in New York City, the son of Joachim F. Bush and Isabel Rosenthall Bush. He was an army veteran of W.W.II. He was a graduate of Columbia Law School and an Adjunct Professor of Law in Estate Planning at Columbia, 1958-1981 and formerly Adjunct Professor of Law in Taxation at NYU, 1981-1987. He was the author of numerous articles and texts. In his later years, he was a member of the Charleston Tax Council and Estate Planning Council. He was a Founder and Director of The Annual Estate Planning Institute at the Medical University of South Carolina. He was a member of the Charleston Symphony Orchestra's Board of Directors and a member of MUSC's President's Advisory Council on Planned Giving. He was a member of the Society of American Magicians. Surviving are his wife, Bette Bain Roe Bush; two daughters, Dorothy B. Seuter of New York and Kathryn D. Rucker of Connecticutt; 4 grandchildren and a great-grandchild.
Have you noticed how many well-educated characters are holding forth on New York stages?The physicists of ''Copenhagen,'' the accomplished playwright of ''The Real Thing,'' the literati of ''The Designated Mourner'' -- all are challenging, and charming, audiences with the force of intellect. Lyman Felt, the self-justifying bigamist of ''The Ride Down Mount Morgan,'' makes his case with the well-reasoned eloquence of a philosopher, and even in a romantic comedy like ''Dirty Blonde,'' the lead male character is a film historian. Forrest Gumpism may still be alive in the land, but one thing this spate of excellent plays reminds us is that learning is desirable, not least because it enriches the emotions. In case you've forgotten, intellectuals are people too.Have you noticed how many well-educated characters are holding forth on New York stages?The physicists of ''Copenhagen,'' the accomplished playwright of ''The Real Thing,'' the literati of ''The Designated Mourner'' -- all are challenging, and charming, audiences with the force of intellect. Lyman Felt, the self-justifying bigamist of ''The Ride Down Mount Morgan,'' makes his case with the well-reasoned eloquence of a philosopher, and even in a romantic comedy like ''Dirty Blonde,'' the lead male character is a film historian. Forrest Gumpism may still be alive in the land, but one thing this spate of excellent plays reminds us is that learning is desirable, not least because it enriches the emotions. In case you've forgotten, intellectuals are people too.Happily, this trend is being perpetuated with ''Proof,'' an exhilarating and assured new play by David Auburn that turns the esoteric world of higher mathematics literally into a back porch drama, one that is as accessible and compelling as a detective story. The play, which opened yesterday at the Manhattan Theater Club, is fundamentally a mystery about the authorship of a particularly important proof, a mystery that is solved in the end; it is also, however, about the unravelable enigma of genius, and the toll it can take on those who are beset with it, aspire to it or merely live in its vicinity.In that service, the play takes great pains to depict the study of mathematics as a painful joy, not as the geek-making obsession of stereotype, but as human labor, both ennobling and humbling, by people who, like musicians or painters (or playwrights), can envision an elusive beauty in the universe and are therefore both enlivened by its pursuit and daunted by the commitment. It does this not by showing them at work but by showing them trying to live and cope when they can't, won't or simply aren't, and in so doing makes the argument that mathematics is a business for the common heart as well as the uncommon brain.As directed by Daniel Sullivan and performed by an exemplary cast, ''Proof'' has the pace of a psychological thriller, and if its resolution (''lumpy'' rather than elegant, to use a word that one character uses to describe the titular proof) tilts toward the sentimental, the characters deserve to be hopeful. As one woman exiting the theater ahead of me said to her companion, ''It's like 'Copenhagen' with a happy ending,'' an oversimplified review, perhaps, but in spirit, close enough.At the center of the play is Catherine, a young woman who is about to bury her father, a once-great mathematician at the University of Chicago whose final years were beset by madness. Played with stirring unsettledness by Mary-Louise Parker, Catherine has inherited her father's handwriting, his humor and, to an indeterminate degree, both his genius and illness.''A taste for the mysteries of numbers is excessively rare,'' the German mathematician Karl Friedrich Gauss wrote to Sophie Germain, a gifted young French woman, some 200 years ago. Catherine has the letter memorized. Its acknowledgment that such a predilection is particularly rare in women is a source of pride and inspiration to her, but it makes her fearful as well; she has witnessed firsthand the jumble that mathematics can make of a working brain. Having quit her own studies years earlier to care for her father, she is, as we see her first on the eve of the funeral -- and her 25th birthday -- at the intersection of a haunting past and blank future. Drinking cheap champagne from the bottle on the back porch of the house she now lives in alone -- to anyone who knows Chicago, John Lee Beatty's staunch, brick set will locate the play precisely -- she is disheveled, bitter, immobilized by depression.Ms. Parker is immediately vivid as Catherine, a woman whose sense of defeat is both circumstantial and self-imposed, someone who is aware she has both brain power and sex appeal in spades but trusts neither enough to exhibit them.She is herself only with her father (Larry Bryggman), who appears intermittently in both flashbacks and dreams, dramatically risky scenes that are skillfully integrated into the narrative by Mr. Auburn and performed by Mr. Bryggman and Ms. Parker with the sad -- and occasionally droll -- resignation of people holding onto a lifeline of mutual understanding.Eloquently snappish in her self-pity, Catherine is, with everyone else, an intimidating presence, except that her body language, in Ms. Parker's performance, can't help but be a fetching plea for salvation. Her inner conflict determinedly keeps at bay her well-meaning sister, Claire, a nonmathematician (she didn't get the family's more troublesome genes) who, as played with a fine blend of anger and concern by Johanna Day, is understandably exasperated by her sister's obstinate antics and wants to sell the house and bring Catherine back with her to New York where she won't be alone with her demons.Fortunately for Catherine, she is being courted, shyly but insistently, by Hal Dobbs (Ben Shenkman), a former student of her father's who has been going through the great man's notebooks hoping to find unpublished revelations that may be masked by deranged scribbling. Perhaps conditioned by his chosen profession, Hal doesn't accede to rejection readily, or maybe he doesn't recognize it; he is moved by Catherine as much as he was by her father. In a role written both to acknowledge and debunk the stereotype of the socially inept math nerd, Mr. Shenkman wonderfully evokes the hesitant charm of a young man whose self-awareness tells him that he is more than brainy but less than suave.Do Catherine and Hal belong together? That, pardon the expression, is a complex equation for any two people to solve. As their mutual affection and trust waxes and wanes over the course of an autumn weekend, the issue of genius -- who has it and what does it portend? -- turns out to be the elusive variable.But ultimately this is emotional math, the sort that everyone and no one understands. Without any baffling erudition -- if you know what a prime number is, there won't be a single line of dialogue you find perplexing -- the play presents mathematicians as both blessed and bedeviled by the gift for abstraction that ties them achingly to one another and separates them, also achingly, from concrete-minded folks like you and me. And perhaps most satisfying of all, it does so without a moment of meanness. ''Proof'' reaches into remote cerebral terrain and finds -- guess what? -- good people. Intelligence a virtue? Q.E.D.PROOF  By David Auburn; directed by Daniel Sullivan; sets by John Lee Beatty; costumes by Jess Goldstein; lighting by Pat Collins; sound by John Gromada; production stage manager, James Harker; production manager, Michael R. Moody; associate artistic director, Michael Bush; general manager, Harold Wolpert. Presented by Manhattan Theater Club, Lynne Meadow, artistic director; Barry Grove, executive director. At City Center, Stage 1, 131 West 55th Street, Manhattan.WITH: Larry Bryggman (Robert), Mary-Louise Parker (Catherine), Ben Shenkman (Hal) and Johanna Day (Claire).THEATER REVIEW
Gov. George W. Bush set aside his customary reserve toward House Republicans in a trip to Capitol Hill today and was rewarded with an outpouring of admiration.The event was more a pep rally than a formal address as Mr. Bush spoke for about 20 minutes to House Republicans at the Capitol Hill Club, underscoring many of his campaign themes. He touched on his plan for a partial privatization of Social Security and mentioned that he would work to overhaul Medicare, repeal the inheritance tax and share part of the budget surplus with taxpayers.Gov. George W. Bush set aside his customary reserve toward House Republicans in a trip to Capitol Hill today and was rewarded with an outpouring of admiration.The event was more a pep rally than a formal address as Mr. Bush spoke for about 20 minutes to House Republicans at the Capitol Hill Club, underscoring many of his campaign themes. He touched on his plan for a partial privatization of Social Security and mentioned that he would work to overhaul Medicare, repeal the inheritance tax and share part of the budget surplus with taxpayers.Mr. Bush, the presumptive Republican presidential nominee, made a point of highlighting themes he believes unite the party and avoided mentioning his past differences with House Republicans over issues like tax credits, lawmakers at the meeting said. And he offered to campaign for House members.He also spoke briefly about his support for establishing normal trade relations with China. At one point, he asked members who opposed the measure, scheduled for a vote on Wednesday, to reconsider. Afterward, he buttonholed a few members who were still undecided and tried to persuade them to vote for the measure.If House Republicans still felt slighted by Mr. Bush's wary reserve toward them, they did not show it.''If you had been in there, you would never think there had been a problem,'' said Representative Charlie Norwood of Georgia. ''How can we all agree with him 100 percent of the time? We don't even agree with our wives 100 percent of the time. But on the big picture, we all agree.''Representative Christopher Shays of Connecticut said he was impressed with Mr. Bush's sense of conviction, especially on Social Security.''He's going to the mat on the Social Security issue because he believes in it,'' Mr. Shays said. ''This is coming from the heart. The conventional wisdom is you don't talk about Social Security. He wants to confront that issue.''''There's a real difference between him and Al Gore, and he relishes that,'' Mr. Shays added.Members said they left the meeting feeling charged-up about the November elections and about Mr. Bush's prospects, a stark contrast to Bob Dole's meeting with House Republicans four years ago.Representative Benjamin A. Gilman of upstate New York called the gathering ''ebullient,'' adding that there was not a single negative vibration.THE 2000 CAMPAIGN: THE HOUSE REPUBLICANS
On the eve of the China trade vote, while the Clinton Administration was still nailing down support for the bill's passage, Vice President Al Gore flew off to Pittsburgh. The Steel City, one of the nation's last redoubts of big labor, was host to a conference of the service employees union, the home base of the president of the A.F.L.-C.I.O., which has devoted itself to killing the legislation.Heading for union turf at such a juncture is one more sign of Mr. Gore's ambivalence, if not toward the bill, then toward his public association with the bill.On the eve of the China trade vote, while the Clinton Administration was still nailing down support for the bill's passage, Vice President Al Gore flew off to Pittsburgh. The Steel City, one of the nation's last redoubts of big labor, was host to a conference of the service employees union, the home base of the president of the A.F.L.-C.I.O., which has devoted itself to killing the legislation.Heading for union turf at such a juncture is one more sign of Mr. Gore's ambivalence, if not toward the bill, then toward his public association with the bill.Even as the administration is trying to round up last-minute votes, the vice president was engaged with labor out of town rather than working against it on Capitol Hill.''Which side is the vice president on?'' Representative Charles B. Rangel, the New York Democrat, said in an interview. ''He doesn't want to offend anybody.'' Mr. Rangel said that Mr. Gore had called him about the bill but that he was already supporting it and that there was not much point to the conversation.The service workers' union and its former chief, John Sweeney, who is now president of the A.F.L.-C.I.O., have essentially given Mr. Gore a pass on the China bill, but not everyone in the labor movement is feeling so generous.The president of the United Auto Workers today offered one of the most blistering assessments of Mr. Gore's actions on behalf of the bill. Mr. Gore has been two-faced, the union president said, and is driving the auto workers into the arms of one of the auto industry's enduring nemesis, Ralph Nader, who is also running for president.''He has tried to have it both ways on China,'' an outraged Stephen P. Yokich, president of the 1.3-million-strong auto workers union, said of Mr. Gore in a statement today.''One moment, presidential candidate Gore is telling the labor movement that he believes human rights, workers' rights, and environmental protections should be included in core trade agreements; the next, Vice President Gore is holding hands with the profiteers of the world and singing the praises'' of the trade agreement and ''lobbying'' for it.Mr. Gore, speaking to reporters in Pittsburgh, brushed aside the attack, saying the election was a long time away and that he would not entertain hypothetical questions.Still, criticism from a putative ally goes a long way toward explaining Mr. Gore's reluctance to take a more visible role in promoting the trade agreement. The Gore campaign has hoped that the vice president could use the issue to convey that he is not beholden to labor and that he is willing to break with an important constituency over principle.''I just want to tell you forthrightly I don't share your views on this particular issue,'' Mr. Gore said to several thousand service workers today.Mr. Gore has said numerous times that he supports the trade agreement, and he took part in a White House pep rally to advance it. He also has said that he has called members of Congress to lobby on behalf of the bill.But as he runs with labor's endorsement and seeks to energize union workers behind his candidacy, the degree of Mr. Gore's support has been questioned.He caused consternation at the White House in February after labor leaders said he had indicated that he would negotiate a tougher pact than Mr. Clinton negotiated. Administration officials were worried that Mr. Gore's stance could give political cover to Democrats who opposed the bill. Mr. Gore then wrote to the nation's chief business lobbying group, the National Association of Manufacturers, to reassure it of his support.Congressional Democrats who oppose the measure said that many among their number had no sign that the vice president was actively working for passage. And one business lobbyist, who did not want to be identified, put it this way: ''The vice president's enthusiasm has been spectacularly underwhelming.''Unlike Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, Mr. Gore's Republican rival for the presidency, Mr. Gore has not devoted a speech to the single topic of the China bill. When Mr. Bush addressed it last week at a Boeing factory in Everett, Washington, his impassioned remarks gave the appearance that he was more closely allied with President Clinton on this matter than Mr. Gore.Today, Mr. Bush met with Republicans privately on Capitol Hill and reiterated his support for the bill. Members said afterward that he asked those who plan to vote against it to reconsider their vote.It is not clear whether Mr. Gore's lower-key approach will advance either his beliefs in economic globalization or his political aspirations.Stephen P. Hess, a presidential scholar at the Brookings Institution, a liberal research organization, said that Mr. Gore's blurry approach raised legitimate questions. But he also suggested that Mr. Gore's posture over the bill has reinforced an impression that the vice president is overly cautious and calculating. ''You feel that Gore really is an internationalist, but for heaven's sake, why doesn't he come out and say it?'' Mr. Hess said. ''Everything has become so calculated.''Mr. Clinton, too, has shown some calculation. He had planned a national television address Sunday night on the trade bill, one of his most important foreign policy objectives. But he canceled it when it was clear that the bill was dividing Democrats and would have raised the awkward specter of Representative Richard A. Gephardt, the Democratic leader from Missouri, who opposes the bill, giving the official response to the president of his own party.Democrats say the unions have riven the party, in part by running commercials against some members who oppose the bill while they have essentially given Mr. Gore the kid-glove treatment.''A lot of people are concerned just how committed the unions are to hurting members of Congress and how they use a different standard for the vice president,'' Mr. Rangel said. ''We don't want them to be cruel to the vice president, but we're running for re-election too.''THE CHINA TRADE WRANGLE: VICE PRESIDENT
Since early December, the Sierra Club has been running television commercials that attack Gov. George W. Bush's environmental record in Texas. In this new 30-second spot, which is going on the air this week in St. Louis, Milwaukee, Detroit and Lansing, Mich., the organization is expanding its effort to portray the Republican as indifferent to the environment.PRODUCER -- Haddow Communications.ON THE SCREEN -- Shots of two Texas residents, Ed Parten of Kingwood and Tamara Maschino of Seabrook, alternate with scenes of sewage spilling into waterways, smoke billowing from factories and a little girl being treated by a machine to assist her breathing.SCRIPT -- Mr. Parten: All of our lakes have water quality problems.Narrator: Texas leads the nation in the number of factories violating clean water standards.Ms. Maschino: We've got too many children on breathing machines, too many people with asthma.Narrator: Texas has the most industrial air pollution in the nation.Ms. Maschino: We're in a crisis situation.Mr. Parten: We've contacted George Bush's office and he has the attitude that he's not interested.Narrator: Call George Bush. Tell him to oppose legislation in Congress that weakens penalties for clean air and water violators. For our families, for our future.ACCURACY -- Governors in large states seeking higher office have to expect to run on their records, and the environment is an issue on which Democrats believe Mr. Bush is highly vulnerable; Vice President Al Gore regularly decries Mr. Bush's stewardship of a state that ranks in several categories as one of the nation's most polluted. Texas's vast and influential oil and chemical industries have yielded the state riches but also some pollution problems. Houston is among the nation's most smoggy cities, and the release of toxins into waterways is a growing problem. But just as the Sierra Club quotes from federal reports that describe Texas's environmental flaws, Mr. Bush can cite some advancements, such as an initiative to reduce emissions from older plants and the expansion of a program begun by his predecessor, Ann W. Richards, a Democrat, to reward companies that cut their toxic waste by half.SCORECARD -- The environmental advocacy group is spending $250,000 to run this commercial in four Midwestern and border states: Missouri, Wisconsin, Michigan and, next week, Ohio, all of which are considered potentially decisive in the fall campaign. The Sierra Club started its advertising blitz two months before the New Hampshire primary and has emerged as one of the most active and visible special-interest groups of the campaign on television. It is planning to spend $8 million to raise public awareness of environmental issues. Mr. Bush's efforts to counter the club's assertions have been fairly low key, limited to events like a news conference in April in which he unveiled a plan to hasten the cleanup of abandoned industrial sites.PETER MARKSSince early December, the Sierra Club has been running television commercials that attack Gov. George W. Bush's environmental record in Texas. In this new 30-second spot, which is going on the air this week in St. Louis, Milwaukee, Detroit and Lansing, Mich., the organization is expanding its effort to portray the Republican as indifferent to the environment.PRODUCER -- Haddow Communications.ON THE SCREEN -- Shots of two Texas residents, Ed Parten of Kingwood and Tamara Maschino of Seabrook, alternate with scenes of sewage spilling into waterways, smoke billowing from factories and a little girl being treated by a machine to assist her breathing.SCRIPT -- Mr. Parten: All of our lakes have water quality problems.Narrator: Texas leads the nation in the number of factories violating clean water standards.Ms. Maschino: We've got too many children on breathing machines, too many people with asthma.Narrator: Texas has the most industrial air pollution in the nation.Ms. Maschino: We're in a crisis situation.Mr. Parten: We've contacted George Bush's office and he has the attitude that he's not interested.Narrator: Call George Bush. Tell him to oppose legislation in Congress that weakens penalties for clean air and water violators. For our families, for our future.ACCURACY -- Governors in large states seeking higher office have to expect to run on their records, and the environment is an issue on which Democrats believe Mr. Bush is highly vulnerable; Vice President Al Gore regularly decries Mr. Bush's stewardship of a state that ranks in several categories as one of the nation's most polluted. Texas's vast and influential oil and chemical industries have yielded the state riches but also some pollution problems. Houston is among the nation's most smoggy cities, and the release of toxins into waterways is a growing problem. But just as the Sierra Club quotes from federal reports that describe Texas's environmental flaws, Mr. Bush can cite some advancements, such as an initiative to reduce emissions from older plants and the expansion of a program begun by his predecessor, Ann W. Richards, a Democrat, to reward companies that cut their toxic waste by half.SCORECARD -- The environmental advocacy group is spending $250,000 to run this commercial in four Midwestern and border states: Missouri, Wisconsin, Michigan and, next week, Ohio, all of which are considered potentially decisive in the fall campaign. The Sierra Club started its advertising blitz two months before the New Hampshire primary and has emerged as one of the most active and visible special-interest groups of the campaign on television. It is planning to spend $8 million to raise public awareness of environmental issues. Mr. Bush's efforts to counter the club's assertions have been fairly low key, limited to events like a news conference in April in which he unveiled a plan to hasten the cleanup of abandoned industrial sites.PETER MARKSTHE 2000 CAMPAIGN: THE AD CAMPAIGN
Responding to Gov. George W. Bush's criticism of the Clinton administration's policies on Israel, Vice President Al Gore today accused Mr. Bush's father of trying to pressure Israel to adopt positions it strongly opposed during his presidency.In a speech before the American Israel Public Affairs Committee, a pro-Israel lobbying group, Mr. Gore criticized the former president, George Bush, for seeking to withhold American loan guarantees to Israel in 1991 unless it agreed to stop building new settlements in the West Bank and Gaza Strip. He called that policy an ''insulting concept'' intended ''to bully'' Israel.Responding to Gov. George W. Bush's criticism of the Clinton administration's policies on Israel, Vice President Al Gore today accused Mr. Bush's father of trying to pressure Israel to adopt positions it strongly opposed during his presidency.In a speech before the American Israel Public Affairs Committee, a pro-Israel lobbying group, Mr. Gore criticized the former president, George Bush, for seeking to withhold American loan guarantees to Israel in 1991 unless it agreed to stop building new settlements in the West Bank and Gaza Strip. He called that policy an ''insulting concept'' intended ''to bully'' Israel.Mr. Gore also told the crowd of 2,000 people that in 1988, as a senator from Tennessee, he had opposed a Reagan administration plan to get Israel to take part against its wishes in a peace conference involving the Soviet Union and Arab nations.''I stood against the efforts of the two previous administrations to pressure Israel to take stands against its own view of what was in Israel's best interest,'' Mr. Gore said to warm applause. ''When a friend's survival is potentially at stake, you don't pressure that friend to take steps that it believes are clearly contrary to what is in that friend's best interests.''Mr. Gore made his remarks a day after Governor Bush, the likely Republican nominee for president, used a speech before the same organization to accuse the Clinton administration of trying ''to make Israel conform to its own plans and timetables.'' The governor also asserted that the administration had taken sides in the most recent Israeli election by supporting Ehud Barak in his victorious campaign over Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu.In his comments today, Mr. Gore did not mention Governor Bush. But he made repeated references to Presidents Reagan and Bush, at one point asserting that both men took a hands-off approach to Middle East policy.''When we took office almost eight year ago, President Clinton and I decided that the United States needed to chart a new course with regard to the Middle East peace process,'' Mr. Gore said. ''Unlike our immediate predecessors, we chose to get intimately involved.''And he reminded the crowd of President Bush's failure to oust  President Saddam Hussein of Iraq in  the Persian Gulf war of 1991. ''You know as well as I know that as long as Saddam Hussein stays in power, there can be no comprehensive peace for the people of Israel or the people of the Middle East,'' Mr. Gore said.After the speech, Mr. Gore flew to the annual convention of the Service Employees International Union in Pittsburgh, where he continued his attack on Mr. Bush's proposal to allow taxpayers to invest a portion of their Social Security payroll taxes.Mr. Bush contends that private investment accounts would allow taxpayers to take advantage of booming markets and help stabilize the system, which is projected to become insolvent in 2037. But Mr. Gore argues that privatization, as he calls it, would bankrupt the system.Today, Mr. Gore told the 1.4-million-member union, which has endorsed him, that Mr. Bush's plan presented a ''special risk'' for service workers because the government might be forced to increase the retirement age to finance it. Mr. Bush denies that.''I don't care what the actuarial tables say about people living longer, when somebody who is working in hard physical-labor jobs get to the present retirement age, they shouldn't be told they have to keep working until they are 70 years old,'' Mr. Gore said. ''The Bush privatization plan doesn't just open the door to raising the retirement age, it practically rolls out a red carpet for the idea.''THE 2000 CAMPAIGN: THE VICE PRESIDENT
It lacked details and raised, but failed to answer, tantalizing questions. But Gov. George W. Bush's call today for ''a new approach'' to the nation's nuclear arsenal represented what could be, in the view of experts, a significant shift in arms control and post-cold-war relations with Russia.In his remarks at the National Press Club, Mr. Bush embraced concepts that arms controllers have long advocated, including deeper reductions in warheads and steps to ease the highest levels of alert at which those weapons can be launched on a moment's notice.It lacked details and raised, but failed to answer, tantalizing questions. But Gov. George W. Bush's call today for ''a new approach'' to the nation's nuclear arsenal represented what could be, in the view of experts, a significant shift in arms control and post-cold-war relations with Russia.In his remarks at the National Press Club, Mr. Bush embraced concepts that arms controllers have long advocated, including deeper reductions in warheads and steps to ease the highest levels of alert at which those weapons can be launched on a moment's notice.He even left open the possibility of dramatic, unilateral steps, evoking his father's decision in 1991 to remove American bombers from alert and withdraw short-range nuclear weapons from Europe and Asia, a move quickly matched by the last Soviet leader, Mikhail S. Gorbachev.But in calling for missile defenses not only for the United States but also for its allies, Mr. Bush challenged the longtime orthodoxy of arms control: that prohibiting defenses allowed limits in offenses.That assumption, embodied in the Antiballistic Missile Treaty of 1972, stipulated that the ability of either side to destroy the other -- mutually assured destruction -- created a safer world by making the temptation to use nuclear weapons simply too risky to consider.''Our mutual security need no longer depend on a nuclear balance of terror,'' Mr. Bush declared, surrounded by members of Republican administrations who once defended some of the very assumptions that he challenged today.Many of the proposals outlined by Mr. Bush, the presumptive Republican presidential nominee, were greeted with striking praise from arms-control experts. In particular, they welcomed his pledge to ask the Pentagon to review its targeting strategies and rethink the number of warheads, which Mr. Bush called ''expensive relics of dead conflicts.''But they warned about the risks in other parts of Mr. Bush's vision. Mr. Bush's seemingly open-ended view of missile defenses, they said, could undercut the benefits of his proposals to reduce the number of weapons and take ''as many weapons as possible'' off ''hair-trigger status.''''It's very encouraging from the prospect of unilateral reductions,'' said George R. Perkovich, director of the W. Alton Jones Foundation, a private organization in Charlottesville, Va. ''But I don't think that kind of gesture is going to change any of the problems with our relationship with Russia. Even if we're willing to get to lower levels, the Russians aren't, because of the kind of national missile defense he's proposing.''Bruce G. Blair, president of the Center for Defense Information here and a strong advocate for reducing the alert status of American and Russian forces, welcomed Mr. Bush's remarks. But he said they contained inherent contradictions.Mr. Blair said that if the United States proceeded with a significant missile defense system, Russia would feel compelled to keep its forces on alert to preserve their ability to launch an overwhelming counterattack. A heightened Russian posture, he added, would convince the Pentagon that the steps Mr. Bush said he would pursue -- even unilaterally -- would not be possible.''They're working at cross-purposes,'' Mr. Blair said.Neither Mr. Bush nor his aides would discuss his proposals in detail, leaving many questions about how -- and whether -- he could bring about a new era of arms control in a Bush presidency. He did not rule out creating a missile defense based at sea or in space, which would prove even more unsettling to the Russians than the limited system the Clinton administration is considering and would certainly require abrogation of the A.B.M. treaty.And while he said he favored reducing arsenals below the 3,000 to 3,500 warheads negotiated under the second strategic arms reduction treaty, or Start II, he did not say whether he would go as low as the proposed Start III levels of 2,000 or 2,500.Mr. Bush emphasized that he would never make any reductions that the Pentagon did not endorse, but it has long been the Pentagon that has resisted deeper reductions in warheads.Today, the Joint Chiefs of Staff, along with Adm. Richard W. Mies, the commander of the strategic force, appeared before the Senate's Armed Services Committee and testified that they would oppose any further reductions in warheads beyond Start III, something that Russia has proposed.''There is a cushion in larger numbers,'' Admiral Mies said. ''And there is a tyranny in smaller numbers that reduces stability in certain situations.''Michael Krepon, president of the Henry L. Stimson Center, a research group here, said it was possible to move past the ''cold-war logic'' of mutually assured destruction and allow for a defensive system. The key, he said, was to manage a ''cooperative transition'' with the Russians that would reassure them that they would not lose their strategic leverage when the United States builds a defensive shield.''What George W. did not tell us was the kind of defenses and the architecture he is envisioning,'' Mr. Krepon said. ''Those particulars will clarify whether or not this cooperative transition is likely to succeed.''THE 2000 CAMPAIGN: THE REACTION
THE HOUSEMISSOURI DEMOCRAT QUITS RACE -- Battling breast cancer, Representative Pat Danner, Democrat of Missouri, has ended her bid for re-election to a fifth term. Her surprise departure, announced late Monday, makes her the eighth House Democrat to retire this year, compared with 24 Republicans who are leaving, and hangs still another question mark over the struggle for control of the House this year. Ms. Danner's son Steve, a former state representative, immediately said he would run in her place in the August primary. Ms. Danner, a 66-year-old moderate-to-conservative, disclosed in January that she was being treated for breast cancer but said that her prognosis was excellent. She won 71 percent of the vote in her re-election in 1998 and seemed headed for an easy victory this year in her Congressional district, the Sixth, which  Bill Clinton carried in 1992 and 1996. But Republican leaders said they believed that her withdrawal gave them a good shot at picking up a seat. ''This is a crushing setback for Democrats,'' Representative Thomas M. Davis III of Virginia, chairman of the National Republican Congressional Committee, said. His Democratic counterpart, Representative Patrick Kennedy of Rhode Island, said that ''the Sixth District is Democratic territory.''Dirk Johnson (NYT)THE HOUSEMISSOURI DEMOCRAT QUITS RACE -- Battling breast cancer, Representative Pat Danner, Democrat of Missouri, has ended her bid for re-election to a fifth term. Her surprise departure, announced late Monday, makes her the eighth House Democrat to retire this year, compared with 24 Republicans who are leaving, and hangs still another question mark over the struggle for control of the House this year. Ms. Danner's son Steve, a former state representative, immediately said he would run in her place in the August primary. Ms. Danner, a 66-year-old moderate-to-conservative, disclosed in January that she was being treated for breast cancer but said that her prognosis was excellent. She won 71 percent of the vote in her re-election in 1998 and seemed headed for an easy victory this year in her Congressional district, the Sixth, which  Bill Clinton carried in 1992 and 1996. But Republican leaders said they believed that her withdrawal gave them a good shot at picking up a seat. ''This is a crushing setback for Democrats,'' Representative Thomas M. Davis III of Virginia, chairman of the National Republican Congressional Committee, said. His Democratic counterpart, Representative Patrick Kennedy of Rhode Island, said that ''the Sixth District is Democratic territory.''Dirk Johnson (NYT)THE SENATEMICHIGAN RACE HEATS UP -- When it comes to cost, mean-spirited verbiage and manipulation by out-of-state interests, Michigan has never seen a race like the current one for the Senate. The incumbent freshman Republican, Spencer Abraham, and his Democratic challenger, Representative Debbie Stabenow, are on their way to spending a record $15 million on the contest. Senator Abraham has taken to calling Ms. Stabenow ''the queen of soft money.'' She says he is a ''tool of Washington's special interests. The contest, which could help decide control of the Senate next year, is so hot that even the latest poll has become an issue. Made public over the weekend by the EPIC/MRA polling organization of Lansing, it shows Ms. Stabenow taking a four-percentage-point lead after being down three points in April and up six in March. Mr. Abraham's take on that switch, whatever his earlier takes: the pollster, Edward V. Sarpolus, cannot be trusted because he once worked for some Democrats. Mr. Sarpolus's reply: Most pollsters have done some work for candidates, and the senator is being ''childish.''Nichole M. Christian (NYT)THE DEMOCRATSGORE LEADS IN HOLLYWOOD MONEY -- Entertainment industry donors, historically more Democratic than Republican, give Vice President Al Gore more campaign money than they give Gov. George W. Bush of Texas. Through March 30 in the current election cycle, Mr. Gore collected $858,865 from executives and others employed by television, movie and music companies, while Mr. Bush brought in $661,877, according to the latest figures compiled by the Center for Responsive Politics, a nonpartisan study group in Washington. Over all, Mr. Bush has a 2-to-1 lead in fund-raising, $84 million to $36 million, not including federal matching funds. The entertainment industry is Mr. Gore's fifth-largest campaign contributor; it is No. 20 on the Bush list.(AP)
Following are excerpts from a transcript of Gov. George W. Bush's remarks yesterday in Washington on national security, and the question-and-answer session that followed and included a brief remark by Gen. Colin L. Powell, as recorded by The New York Times:Opening RemarksToday, I am here with some of our nation's leading statesmen and defense experts. And there is broad agreement that our nation needs a new approach to nuclear security that matches a new era.Following are excerpts from a transcript of Gov. George W. Bush's remarks yesterday in Washington on national security, and the question-and-answer session that followed and included a brief remark by Gen. Colin L. Powell, as recorded by The New York Times:Opening RemarksToday, I am here with some of our nation's leading statesmen and defense experts. And there is broad agreement that our nation needs a new approach to nuclear security that matches a new era.When it comes to nuclear weapons, the world has changed faster than U.S. policy. The emerging security threats to the United States, its friends and allies and even to Russia now come from rogue states, terrorist groups and other adversaries seeking weapons of mass destruction and the means to deliver them. Threats also come from insecure nuclear stockpiles and the proliferation of dangerous technologies.Russia itself is no longer our enemy. The cold-war logic that led to creation of massive stockpiles on both sides is now outdated. Our mutual security need no longer depend on a nuclear balance of terror. While deterrence remains the first line of defense against nuclear attack, the standoff of the cold war was born of a different time. That was a time when our arsenal also served to check the conventional superiority of the Warsaw Pact. Then the Soviet Union's power reached deep into the heart of Europe to Berlin and Warsaw, Budapest and Prague. Today these are the capitals of NATO countries.Yet almost a decade after the end of the cold war, our nuclear policy still resides in that already distant past.The Clinton-Gore administration has had over seven years to bring the U.S. force posture into the post-cold-war world. Instead, they remained locked in a cold-war mentality. It is time to leave the cold war behind and defend against the new threats of the 21st century.America must build effective missile defenses based on the best available options at the earliest possible date. Our missile defense must be designed to protect all 50 states and our friends and allies and deployed forces overseas from missile attacks by rogue nations or accidental launches.The Clinton administration at first denied the need for a national missile defense system. Then it delayed. Now the approach it proposes is flawed, a system initially based on a single site, when experts say that more is needed. A missile defense system should not only defend our country; it should defend our allies, with whom I will consult as we develop our plans. And any change in the A.B.M. Treaty must allow the technologies and experiments required to deploy adequate missile defenses.The administration is driving toward a hasty decision on a political timetable. No decision would be better than a flawed agreement that ties the hands of the next president and prevents America from defending itself.Yet there are positive, practical ways to demonstrate to Russia that we are no longer enemies. Russia, our allies in the world need to understand our intentions. America's development of missile defenses is a search for security, not a search for advantage.America should rethink the requirements for nuclear deterrence in a new security environment. The premises of cold-war nuclear targeting should no longer dictate the size of our arsenal. As president, I will ask the secretary of defense to conduct an assessment of our nuclear force posture and determine how best to meet our security needs. While the exact number of weapons can come only from such an assessment, I will pursue the lowest possible number consistent with our national security.It should be possible to reduce the number of American nuclear weapons significantly further than what has been already agreed to under Start II without compromising our security in any way. We should not keep weapons that our military planners do not need. These unneeded weapons are the expensive relics of dead conflicts, and they do nothing to make us more secure.In addition, the United States should remove as many weapons as possible from high-alert, hair-trigger status.Another unnecessary vestige of cold-war confrontation, preparation for quick launch within minutes after warning of an attack was the rule during the era of superpower rivalry. But today for two nations at peace, keeping so many weapons on high alert may create unacceptable risks of accidental or unauthorized launch.So as president I will ask for an assessment of what we can safely do to lower the alert status of our forces. These changes to our forces should not require years and years of detailed arms control negotiations. There is a precedent that proves the power of leadership. In 1991, the United States invited the Soviet Union to join it in removing tactical nuclear weapons from the arsenal. Huge reductions were achieved in a matter of months, making the world much safer more quickly.Similarly, in the area of strategic nuclear weapons, we should invite the Russian government to accept the new vision that I have outlined and act on it.But the United States should be prepared to lead by example because it is in our best interests and the best interests of the world. This would be an act of principled leadership, a chance to seize the moment and begin a new era of nuclear security, a new era of cooperation on proliferation and nuclear safety.The cold-war era is history. Our nation must recognize new threats, not fixate on old ones. On the issue of nuclear weapons,  the United States has an opportunity to lead to a safer world, both to defend against nuclear threats and reduce nuclear tensions. It is possible to build a missile defense and defuse confrontation with Russia. America should do both. . . .Questions and AnswersQ. I'm just trying to clarify. When you say that we should be prepared to lead by example, are you saying that you'd be prepared to reduce America's nuclear arsenal whether or not the Russians follow suit?MR. BUSH. Yes, and I would hope ----. Yes, I am, and I would work closely with the Russians to convince them to do the same.Q. If they don't do the same, are [unintelligible] arsenal [unintelligible] this nation?A. Oh, I would never do anything to put our nation at risk.I will work with the secretary of the defense to come up with a level of weaponry consistent with the notion that to deter -- to keep a notion to keep the peace to deterrence, but at the same time make a clear signal to the Russians that we are willing to reduce our arsenals to assure them, and to assure the world, that we're a peaceful nation, we have peace in mind.Q. There are many Start III negotiations under way to bring down the level. Do you think the levels being talked about are insufficient? Could you explain what [unintelligible]?A. The definition of sufficient reductions is going to be determined after I consult closely with the secretary of defense and the defense establishment in my administration, the people in my administration.Secondly, Start III should not be an excuse to limit our ability to develop an antiballistic missile system.Q. Governor, are you saying that we ought to share the national defense system with our allies in NATO and perhaps even with our allies in Russia as well? When you say ''protect our allies,'' who do you mean?A. I mean people in Europe, for example. But I also mean Israel. I, yes, I think we ought to consult closely with our allies.As to sharing information and technologies with the Russians, it depends upon how Russia behaves, depends upon how Russia conducts itself as a member of the family of nations.Q. Governor, would you share that technology with Taiwan?A. I think we ought to own the technology, but I'd be willing to use it, if need be, to uphold the Taiwan relations law.Q. Governor, President Clinton will be in Moscow in a week. What are you authorizing him or what would you like to see him do at the negotiations? You're saying that you'd like to see the number of warheads brought down. Would you like to ----.A. What I'm really suggesting is that he not hamstring the ability of the next president to fully develop an antiballistic missile system to protect ourselves and our allies. As I said, no treaty, no agreement, would be better than a flawed agreement. I'm concerned that this administration is not fully devoted to the development of a antiballistic missile system that will work.Q. Governor Bush, this is the second time that you've talked in kind of detail about a national missile defense system. In The New York Times you talked about the cost and how you would pay for it in context with your tax cuts, saving Social Security [unintelligible].A. We have a $4 trillion surplus. I intend to reserve over $2 trillion of that for Social Security; about $1.3 trillion for tax cuts. The remainder will be available to meet priorities.Secondly, the cost of an antiballistic missile system is worth the cost to protect ourselves, to protect our allies. The ability to determine the final cost will be the ability to determine, you know, what the new research in technologies look like, and the current treaty prevents us from fully exploring all options when it comes to the effective deployment of an antiballistic missile system.Q. Governor, at the [unintelligible] United Nations conference in New York last Saturday the United States and four other nuclear powers agreed to [unintelligible] nuclear arsenal [unintelligible]. Do you support that agreement? Are you still opposed to ratification by the United States [unintelligible] on the comprehensive [unintelligible] and how soon would you work for the nuclear disarmament [unintelligible]?A. I will never reduce the levels of the nuclear stockpile of the United States to a position where it would jeopardize our safety and security. And, no, I don't support the comprehensive test ban treaty.Q. You're willing to review the U.N. defense policy. Are you willing to review the U.S. policy regarding Cuba?A. I'll review the policy toward Cuba when Fidel Castro has free elections, frees prisoners and has freedom of the press.Q. Governor, [unintelligible] question this week on China. Are you satisfied that the administration has done everything it can to get P.N.T.R. passed? Do you believe it's going to pass? And did you yourself lobby for it?A. Well, I said a pretty strong statement in Seattle the other day, and a congressman walked up to me last night and said, ''You know something? I want you to know that because of your strong statement, I'm voting for the bill.''I'm going to go to the Hill today. I'm going to encourage members to vote for it. I think the president's given it his best shot. And I was happy to see the vice president finally emerge and make a statement.Q. There's going to be four debates this coming fall ----A. How do you know?Q. Commission on ----A. Oh, O.K., I see. According to Mr. Gore, he wants 60 debates.Q. Well, the commission says that you have to have 15 percent in the polls to get in on the debates. But the consensus seems to be that if it was you and Vice President Gore, you're going to put the country to sleep ----A. Really, well, I appreciate that objective analysis.Q. Would you agree to have Ralph Nader and Pat Buchanan on the debate?A. And all the rest of the candidates, too?Q. No, just those two.A. Why not all the rest?Q. Because they have 5 percent; the rest have minimal.A. Well, maybe they'll be surging in the polls by then. We'll worry about the debates on the debates at the appropriate time. . . .Q. The Russians seem to regard the A.B.M. as the cornerstone of security. You are saying that you will get out of A.B.M. My question, are you willing to talk to the Russians before you make your final decision?A. Of course.Q. You will?A. Absolutely. As I told your foreign minister that I look forward to working with Mr. Putin and explaining my point of view and my attitude about the post-cold-war era.I'm going to look him right in the eye and say, You're no longer the enemy. And we're not your enemy. Surely we can work together to bring certainty into an uncertain world.I look forward to that, and I think it's going to be very important for the next president to clearly state the intentions of the United States, that we're a peaceful nation and that we look forward to working together with Russia to keep the peace, that the world has changed dramatically.Q. So talking about military might, how do you define the national greatness of the United States? Do you think that the national greatness of any country should be defined by military means?A. National greatness of the United States is how we love each other, how one neighbor will help another neighbor, whether or not we can educate our children.The one thing I won't do as president is to allow our military preparedness to slip below levels necessary to keep the peace. I won't let the morale in the United States military deteriorate like it has under this current administration. I understand it's important to have a well-focused, well-paid military to keep the peace. And I'm going to assure Mr. Putin that that's exactly what my intentions are and that we should work together.I'll also assure our allies and friends in Europe of the intentions. It's important for us to strengthen our alliances, which I'm going to do. . . .Q. Are you talking about unilateral reductions in American deployed weapons? And if the Russians didn't reciprocate, would you keep to those reductions? And are you also talking about reducing stockpiles?A. I'm talking about reduce -- both. I'm talking about making sure the level of stockpiles and deployed weaponry is such that we can keep the peace and have a strong deterrence.I recognize we're in a different world, and I'm going to send that signal to the secretary of defense to analyze the world the way it is today, not the way it used to be when the -- it used to be when the Soviet Union had a powerful presence and what now are NATO countries. It's a changed world. And our attitude ought to change. And ----Q. If the Russians don't reciprocate ----A. Well, hopefully they will. I'll look forward to working with the Russians. But if they don't, the level of nuclear readiness is going  to meet our needs. It's going to meet the needs of the United States of America. I will never put our security at risk. . . .Q. You mentioned that you would review American policy toward Cuba once Fidel Castro held free elections and a free press and other standards of democracy. In this week we're in the process of reviewing and possibly changing policy toward China. And I think it's a constant source of confusion in some countries about what is the difference between China's Communist government by those standards that we judge Cuba in terms of a free press, free elections, oppression of minorities, oppression recently in China of a spiritual movement with no political intention. What's the difference?A. The difference is, as far as I'm concerned, that we're trading with an entrepreneurial class in China. That by trade with China that we're encouraging a group of entrepreneurs and small-business owners to be able to get a taste of freedom, that we're giving them an opportunity to grow.That's not the case in Cuba. In Cuba we're trading, in essence, with a government-controlled entity. And my worry is that capital flowing into Cuba will help prop up the Fidel Castro regime.My belief is by trading with an entrepreneurial class in China it will enhance the spread of freedoms in China. And there's a big difference.Q. So the standards that you mentioned before was about free elections and freedom of the press, none of which exists in China.A. Yeah, but it's also a standard, which I failed to mention, that there's the standard who we're trading with. Who we're doing business with.When we trade with China, we're trading more and more with people that are in the private sector, entrepreneurs, and free enterprise is taking hold in China. And I think that's going to be a measure to the extent freedom takes hold in China as well. And I think there's a big difference.Q. Governor, either here today or in a meeting on Thursday [unintelligible] would you ask General Powell to be your vice president or running mate? And/or take another position, especially [unintelligible] as secretary of state?A. I'm not going to tell you. Well, I'm not going to tell him what I'm going to talk to him -- I'm not going to tell you what I talk to him about. I hope he's for me, let me just put it to you that way. . . .Q. Can General Powell answer that question on his attitude on both vice president and some other candidate position such as that [unintelligible]?A. You don't have to if you don't want to.GENERAL POWELL. I think I've answered that on many occasions. The answer's well known. I won't take any time away from the governor to belabor you with ----MR. BUSH. And don't you ever accuse him of being smarmy again.Q. Governor, this program to defend the country against missiles has been problematic from the beginning from a technological point of view both during the Reagan administration and your father's administration, now during the Clinton administration. What technology do you see out there that makes you hopeful that once you implement your program you can actually defend this country against an incoming ----.A. What I see out there is a couple of things. One, the world has changed a lot since the 80's. Science is evolving. Laser technology is evolving. There's a lot of inventiveness in our society that hasn't been unleashed on this particular subject.And, secondly, I see a treaty that makes it hard for us to fully explore the options available, the options available to keep the peace. And there needs to be an administration with a firm commitment to exploring all options and all opportunities. Be able to understand, you know, whether or not a space-based system can work, like some hope it can. And under this administration we have -- I don't think there's been the full commitment to determining what the opportunities and options are for the country. And I think it's important to take a full look at whether or not we can keep the peace. I'm going to remind people in this country ----And the interesting fact is a lot of people think we can defend ourselves against an accidental launch. I think if you were to ask Americans, they will tell you that we've got the capability of defending ourselves. But it's not the case. And I believe the post-cold-war era dictates a different way of thinking.Q. Governor, a follow-up from another question, are you [unintelligible] money question related to the program?A. I'm against soft money.Q. Are you prepared if necessary [unintelligible] to fulfill this broadening vision that now extends to defense policy?A. I don't have to, I'm not going to have to do that. There is enough money in the budget to do so. And there are savings to be had. And there are savings to be had in the budget as well. And I believe there is ample money to do both.Q. Governor, are the people arrayed onstage behind you this morning involved in the formulation of this [unintelligible]?A. Of course.Q. And have they all agreed to advise you on foreign policy and defense matters?A. Yes, they have. And I'm honored to have their support. I'm honored to have their opinions. I've told my supporters I was interested in thinking differently. As we go into the 21st century I want a different point of view when it comes to how to keep the peace. And it's the right thing to do for America, and it's the right thing to do for the world.Thank you all for your time.THE 2000 CAMPAIGN
After spending several cautious days on the sidelines, Hillary Rodham Clinton took out today after her new opponent, Representative Rick A. Lazio, asserting that there were sharp differences between them and criticizing him for saying he would accept the support of the Independence Party in New York, even if its presidential candidate is Patrick J. Buchanan.''I think it's fair to talk about the differences in issues between us, and just over the last several days, we learned some things about his positions that are in very clear contrast from where I stand,'' Mrs. Clinton declared to a long line of television cameras and reporters at a campaign stop here.After spending several cautious days on the sidelines, Hillary Rodham Clinton took out today after her new opponent, Representative Rick A. Lazio, asserting that there were sharp differences between them and criticizing him for saying he would accept the support of the Independence Party in New York, even if its presidential candidate is Patrick J. Buchanan.''I think it's fair to talk about the differences in issues between us, and just over the last several days, we learned some things about his positions that are in very clear contrast from where I stand,'' Mrs. Clinton declared to a long line of television cameras and reporters at a campaign stop here.Her audience of elderly New Yorkers, who had put aside an afternoon of bingo to make way for an appearance by the first lady, watched transfixed as Mrs. Clinton spent seven minutes criticizing Mr. Lazio for his opposition to handgun registration and his support for an $800 billion tax cut proposed by Republicans. Mostly, though, she criticized him for saying he would accept the Independence Party's support.''I do not believe that it's in New York's best interest to support or be aligned with Pat Buchanan, who has been a divisive force, a voice for anti-Semitism,'' Mrs. Clinton said. ''I strongly reject that, and my opponent has not.''Mrs. Clinton's remarks signaled a new phase in her campaign, as she lent her own voice to a line of attack that had until now been carried by her aides. Her decision to criticize Mr. Lazio came after 48 hours of discussion among her advisers about the extent to which Mrs. Clinton's campaign should seek to shape New Yorkers' views of the relatively unknown congressman from Suffolk County by attacking him, and whether Mrs. Clinton herself should take  the lead in seeking to discredit him.Mr. Lazio's campaign spokesman, Dan McLagan, dismissed Mrs. Clinton's attack tonight as ''the typical Clinton Administration modus operandi: search, distort and destroy.''Mr. McLagan said, ''This demonstrates to me that Mrs. Clinton is out of touch with New Yorkers and she seems intent on distorting Rick's record.''Mrs. Clinton's attacks on Mr. Lazio were based on positions he laid out when he appeared on six television interview programs on Sunday, answering detailed questions about his candidacy. The appearances were closely followed by Mrs. Clinton's aides, as they sought to assemble data about their new opponent.Mr. Lazio's aides said the unusually heavy schedule of national television appearances was intended to draw a contrast to Mrs. Clinton, whom they described as leading a relatively cloistered candidacy. The first lady has so far turned down requests to appear on national television interview programs, though she has appeared on New York-based news programs.In the process of gaining the exposure, however, Mr. Lazio found himself questioned intensively about his record and his candidacy less than 24 hours after he entered the race.Mrs. Clinton was clearly moving in today on what she saw as openings in Mr. Lazio's remarks. For example, in saying that he would take the Independence Party support even if Mr. Buchanan is at the top of the ticket, Mr. Lazio took a far less nuanced position than Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani, who had been the Republican candidate.''If I can get it, I will take it,'' Mr. Lazio said on ''Meet the Press.''Mr. Giuliani, aware that Mrs. Clinton's aides were hoping to link him to Mr. Buchanan, did not automatically reject the party's ballot line, which could provide as many as 300,000 votes to the Republican candidate.Mr. McLagan said that Mrs. Clinton was distorting Mr. Lazio's position because the congressman has clearly stated his support for the party's candidate for president. ''The fact is that Rick supports George Bush for president, and opposes Pat Buchanan.''The campaign clipped along at a negative pace even as both sides seemed concerned that they would be blamed for its tenor. Mrs. Clinton bristled today when a television reporter asked whether it was disingenuous to complain that Mr. Lazio was running a ''campaign of insults,'' when, the reporter said, she had been running advertisements attacking Mr. Lazio.''Which ad was that?'' the first lady demanded tersely. While Mrs. Clinton has run no such advertisements, her aides had begun attacking Mr. Lazio's record even before he announced, and Mrs. Clinton said she had no apologies for that.''This is a campaign about issues,'' she said.''
Declaring that the nation's security no longer required ''a nuclear balance of terror,'' Gov. George W. Bush called today for new -- and possibly unilateral -- reductions in American nuclear weapons coupled with a robust antimissile defense system.Though he shied from specifics, Mr. Bush said he wanted to reduce the size of the United States' nuclear arsenal to the ''lowest possible number consistent with our national security'' and below the levels called for under the Start II accord with Russia.Declaring that the nation's security no longer required ''a nuclear balance of terror,'' Gov. George W. Bush called today for new -- and possibly unilateral -- reductions in American nuclear weapons coupled with a robust antimissile defense system.Though he shied from specifics, Mr. Bush said he wanted to reduce the size of the United States' nuclear arsenal to the ''lowest possible number consistent with our national security'' and below the levels called for under the Start II accord with Russia.''We should not keep weapons that our military planners do not need,'' he said, flanked by foreign policy experts from four Republican administrations. ''These unneeded weapons are the expensive relics of dead conflicts.''Asked at a news conference whether that meant he would reduce the nation's nuclear arsenal unilaterally, Mr. Bush said, ''Yes.'' But then he quickly added, ''I would work closely with the Russians to convince them to do the same.'' And he said, ''I would never do anything to put our  nation at risk.'' [Excerpts, Page A21.]Mr. Bush, the presumptive Republican presidential nominee, accompanied his call for nuclear weapons reductions with a full-throated endorsement of a far more expansive  missile defense system than that being explored by the Clinton administration. He said he wanted to examine all options for a global system including ''whether or not a space-based system can work.''''America must build effective missile defenses,'' Mr. Bush said, ''based on the best available options at the earliest possible date. Our missile defense must be designed to protect all 50 states and our friends and allies and deployed forces overseas from missile attacks by rogue nations or accidental launches.''Mr. Bush's lack of experience in foreign policy is one of his biggest political vulnerabilities, and he has been making a concerted drive in recent days to speak out on national security issues.Mr. Bush's appearance today was unlike any event that preceded it in this campaign. In contrast to previous policy speeches, his audience consisted only of several dozen Washington reporters gathered in the National Press Club. His speech was relatively short, and much of his time was devoted to answering questions.To give himself added authority, Mr. Bush spoke while flanked by five prominent experts in national security: Henry A. Kissinger, George P. Shultz, Brent Scowcroft, Colin L. Powell and Donald H. Rumsfeld, several of whom voiced support of Mr. Bush's ideas. The result was some strange political symbolism as Mr. Bush called for new thinking for a new post-cold-war era, surrounded by some of the architects of the nation's cold-war arms control treaties.Although President Clinton has signaled his willingness to negotiate further weapons cuts with Russia, Mr. Bush accused the administration of being ''locked in a cold-war mentality'' on arms control. That was virtually the same charge Vice President Al Gore used against Mr. Bush just a few weeks ago. At that time Mr. Gore, the presumptive Democratic presidential nominee, said Mr. Bush was ''stuck in a cold-war mind-set'' and cited his advocacy of a global missile defense system.Today, Mr. Gore's aides sharply criticized Mr. Bush, saying his approach to nuclear security was unrealistic, that it would not be accepted by the Russians and that it would would undermine years of arms control agreements.Mr. Gore's advisers pointed to Mr. Bush's opposition to the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty and said the governor advocates the radical rewriting, if not outright abolition, of the 1972 Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty.''Bush's agenda is irresponsible and shows that he lacks the depth of experience to keep America safe and secure,'' said Douglas Hattaway, a spokesman for Mr. Gore.Mr. Bush has said he would pull out of the pact if the Russians did not agree to adjust it after ''a reasonable amount of time.''Mr. Gore, like Mr. Clinton, favors negotiating with the Russians to change the antiballistic missile treaty and make way for the more limited missile defense system.With his speech, Mr. Bush aligned himself with a group of foreign policy thinkers who have started to ask whether traditional arms control agreements are suited to the post-cold-war era.Yet Mr. Bush sidestepped a host of questions today by saying that as president he would order his defense secretary to conduct an assessment of the nuclear force structure and only then decide how many nuclear weapons the nation needed.The governor also said he would ask for an assessment of what the nation could do to lower the alert status of its forces. ''Preparation for quick launch -- within minutes after warning of an attack -- was the rule during the era of superpower rivalry,'' he said. ''But today for two nations at peace, keeping so many weapons on high alert may create unacceptable risks of accidental or unauthorized launch.''The 1993 Start II accord, which was recently ratified by the Russian parliament, called for Russia and the United States to slash their arsenals to 3,000 to 3,500 long-range weaponsfrom 6,000.President Clinton and former President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia also set a framework in 1997 for a new round of Start III negotiations to reduce arsenals to 2,000 to 2,500 weapons. Moscow wants to go further and has called for both sides to cut to 1,500 long-range weapons.Pressed on whether he supported the Start III framework, Mr. Bush said he would decide what level of warheads was sufficient only after consultations with his defense secretary and the military.His chief foreign policy adviser, Condoleezza Rice, said later that it was ''conceivable, I suppose, but unlikely'' that a military review could end up recommending weapons levels higher than some of the numbers being contemplated in the Start III negotiations.If Mr. Bush contemplates reducing the nuclear arsenal to less than 2,000 to 2,500 weapons, he could well face resistance from the military.On Capitol Hill today, the Joint Chiefs of Staff said they opposed reducing the United States nuclear arsenal below those levels, though their words were not aimed at Mr. Bush. They appeared at a hearing called by Senator John W. Warner, Republican of Virginia, as a pre-emptive strike against any efforts by the administration to use lower nuclear arms cuts with Russia to win agreement on limited missile defense system.Mr. Bush portrayed his drive for an expansive missile defense system as one that would protect not just the United States but its allies against accidental missile launchings, terrorist strikes or rogue nations. He said that he would share the technology with Europe and Israel and that he might consider sharing it with Russia, depending on ''how Russia behaves.''''Russia, our allies in the world need to understand our intentions,'' he said. ''America's development of missile defenses is a search for security, not a search for advantage.''The Russians have made clear that they adamantly oppose renegotiating the ABM treaty to allow the American deployment of a missile defense system.Mr. Bush insisted that he could afford a robust antimissile defense system along with two other things for which he has called: a $1.3 trillion tax cut and billions of new dollars in spending on social programs and additional tax incentives. The Congressional Budget Office recently estimated that it would cost $60 billion to build a land-based system that would include 250 missile interceptors at two sites.Mr. Bush is interested in a missile defense system far more wide ranging than one Mr. Clinton is examining. Ms. Rice said in an interview that he wants to look at ''all options'' including defense from land, from sea or from space.Leon Fuerth, the national security adviser to Mr. Gore, argued today that the more limited system being examined by the Clinton administration could be in place by 2005 in time to face a possible threat from North Korea. He said Mr. Bush's effort to ''tear up all the technology and start all over again'' would set back development and leave the United States vulnerable to rogue states.Mr. Bush did not mention his father in his speech today, but he clearly had him in mind as a model when he spoke of the possibility of arms reductions carried out without  ''years and years of detailed arms control negotiations.''He used 1991 as an example of the kinds of steps he was advocating. That was the year when President George Bush unilaterally took all American strategic bombers off alert status. He also removed American short-range nuclear weapons from Europe and Asia.Russia promptly followed suit. The Soviet leader, Mikhail S. Gorbachev, pulled Moscow's own short-range missiles back to Russia and promised to cut back the Soviet nuclear arsenal.In talking with reporters, Governor Bush said he had consulted with Mr. Kissinger, Mr. Shultz and the others with him on the policy he was advocating. And he said all had agreed to advise him in the future. But most attention focused on Mr. Powell, who was chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff during the Persian gulf war of 1991 and who many Republicans would like to see as a vice-presidential candidate. Mr. Powell has said he is not interested in the job. ''The answer's well known,'' he said today. ''I won't take any time away from the governor to belabor you with'' being nominated as vice president.Asked whether he had discussed with Mr. Powell the possibility of a  Cabinet post like secretary of state, Mr. Bush shot back to reporters, ''I'm not going to tell you what I talk to him about.''THE 2000 CAMPAIGN: THE TEXAS GOVERNOR
INTERNATIONALA3-13Israel Quits Lebanon; Guerrillas Pour Into Zone  Shiite Muslim guerrillas reclaimed the Israeli-occupied zone in southern Lebanon and rode abandoned Israeli tanks through village after village, six weeks before the Israelis planned to shut down the military buffer zone they controlled along the border.A1INTERNATIONALA3-13Israel Quits Lebanon; Guerrillas Pour Into Zone  Shiite Muslim guerrillas reclaimed the Israeli-occupied zone in southern Lebanon and rode abandoned Israeli tanks through village after village, six weeks before the Israelis planned to shut down the military buffer zone they controlled along the border.A1Prime Minister Ehud Barak declared an end to Israel's two-decade occupation of southern Lebanon, as the last Israeli troops and pro-Israeli militias pulled out of what was once known as Israel's security zone.A13Debate on China Trade Bill  The House opened debate on legislation to grant Beijing permanent normal trading relations, as a final round of horse-trading with undecided members reached furious intensity. A vote is set for today.A1Push to Ease Cuba Embargo  Powerful American farm groups, sensing a shift in sentiment on Capitol Hill, are pushing Congress to soften the 38-year-old trade embargo and to permit the export of food, medicine and medical products.A10U.S. to Revise Arms Controls  The Clinton administration will overhaul controls on arms exports to friendly nations for the first time since the cold war, officials said. The changes are intended to reduce the red tape involved in the licensing of technology sales, information sharing and joint ventures between governments and contractors.A10U.S.-Indonesia Military Ties  Senior defense officials said the administration had quietly resumed military cooperation with Indonesia, eight months after cutting ties following massacres in East Timor.A10Visit to Russian Germ Lab  The State Research Center for Applied Microbiology invited 200 scientists from 10 countries, Western officials and an American reporter into what was once a crown jewel of the Soviet germ warfare empire. The center says it is determined to conduct only peaceful work.A10Germany to Reduce Its Army  The defense minister accepted a recommendation to overhaul and shrink the draft-based army, which is still set up to fight the cold war.A5World BriefingA6NATIONALA16-23Bush Backs Arms Cuts And Antimissile System  Gov. George W. Bush, flanked by prominent figures from four Republican administrations, called for a ''new approach to nuclear security,'' one that includes possible unilateral reductions in American nuclear weapons combined with a robust antimissile defense system. Mr. Bush said he wanted to reduce the size of America's nuclear arsenal to the ''lowest possible number consistent with our national security'' and below the levels called for under the START II treaty with Russia.A1Mr. Bush discussed his broad agenda with House Republicans.A20Assessing Ruling on Cable TV  Analysts said they did not expect sexually explicit cable offerings to increase significantly in the wake of a Supreme Court decision striking down a law that required many cable systems to limit sexually explicit channels to late-night hours.A16Best Water in Rural America  Water from a 5,000-year-old source beneath Independence Village, a 40-unit housing development for the elderly in Montville, Conn., was judged the best tasting in a competition sponsored by the National Rural Drinking Water Association.A16SCIENCE/HEALTHInsulin and Breast Cancer  High levels of insulin in the blood augur badly for women with breast cancer, a Canadian study found. Women with the disease and high levels of insulin who received standard therapy were about eight times more likely to develop a recurrence and die of the disease than women who had normal insulin levels.A22Penalizing Medical Lapses  The Clinton administration said it would seek authority from Congress to levy fines of up to $250,000 on scientists who violate federal human research rules, and $1 million on the universities that employ them.A23A Benefit From Caffeine  A study of 8,004 Japanese-American men in Hawaii suggests that coffee may prevent Parkinson's disease, with caffeine the main factor -- the more the better. But the researchers said it was uncertain whether their results would hold true with other ethnic groups and with women.A17NEW YORK/REGIONB1-12Tour Company's License Is at Risk After Bus Fatality  City officials said they would ask a judge to suspend the license of New York Apple Tours, a day after one of its double-decker tour buses fatally struck a 71-year-old actor in Midtown. The accident renewed concerns about the company's long record of environmental, safety and traffic violations.B1Mrs. Clinton Cites 'Differences'  Hillary Rodham Clinton said there were sharp differences between her and her new Republican opponent, Representative Rick A. Lazio, and she criticized him for saying he would accept the Independence Party's support, even if Patrick J. Buchanan were that party's presidential candidate.B5Mr. Lazio criticized Mrs. Clinton for using ''chauffeured limousines,'' referring to her Secret Service escort. ''This is the way most New Yorkers travel,'' he said during a subway ride, though he was unsure of the cost of his borrowed MetroCard.B5OBITUARIESB11EDUCATIONB12Board Member's Second Job  Irving S. Hamer Jr., who is leading a Board of Education effort to integrate the Internet into the classroom, is co-chairman and a significant stockholder of a company trying out an Internet test-coaching program in city public schools. No laws have been broken, and officials say there is no conflict of interest because no contract is involved.B1College Enrollment Prediction  Enrollment will swell by some two million students -- to 19 million -- over the next 15 years, with black, Hispanic and Asian-American students accounting for 80 percent of the growth, a study said.A16ARTSE1-12SPORTSD1-8Indiana Takes Game 1  The Pacers beat the Knicks, 102-88, to take the early lead in the Eastern Conference Finals.D1BUSINESS DAYC1-24United-US Airways Deal  United is to announce today that it will acquire US Airways for $4.3 billion, creating a carrier with the biggest share of passengers from Boston to New York to Washington.A1Time Warner Scheme  Southwestern Bell is to file complaints with the F.C.C. and Texas regulators today over a Time Warner scheme that used employees' bogus service requests to find where Southwestern Bell could provide high-speed Internet service in Houston. The complaint will also ask that the incident be reviewed in light of Time Warner's proposed merger with America Online. Time Warner said the effort was a local one and should not have been conducted.A1Stocks Continue to Fall  The Nasdaq plunged to its lowest level in six months, as the broad stock market declined for a fifth consecutive day. The Nasdaq lost 199.66 points, or 5.9 percent, to 3,164.55; the Dow fell 120.28 points, or 1.1 percent, to 10,422.27; and the S.& P. 500 slid 26.86, or 1.9 percent, to 1,373.86.C1Suspicion in Japan  Tokyo's omission of an important piece of information on quarterly growth has invigorated critics in and out of government who have long contended that the ruling Liberal Democratic Party manipulates economic data for political reasons.C1Business DigestC1DININGF1-10EDITORIALA24-25Editorials: Drug laws that destroy lives; Peru's tilted election landscape; Topics.  Columns: Paul Krugman, Maureen Dowd.CrosswordE6  TV ListingsE11  Public LivesB2  WeatherD8
PAUL HALLINGBY JR. loves this Caribbean enclave's coral-colored houses, its worn chintz, engraved stationery and imported household help. He treasures what he calls his ''old-fashioned beach house'': a $9 million, 6,500-square-foot villa with two circular driveways and a private beach.Then there is the always-reassuring sight of the neighboring Lyford Cay Club, a pink mansion with Tara-style white columns, where Mr. Hallingby, a managing director emeritus of Bear, Stearns & Company, has been a member for 16 years. He and his friends Sandra McConnell, an Avon heiress, and Bill Paley Jr., a son of William S. Paley and his wife, Babe, appreciate the club's conservative prohibitions. Couples must be married to stay overnight, public displays of affection are frowned upon and bikinis cannot be itsy-bitsy. Everybody still chuckles at the scolding Sir John M. Templeton, the British philanthropist, received for wearing white bathing trunks that went embarrassingly transparent when he hit the water.PAUL HALLINGBY JR. loves this Caribbean enclave's coral-colored houses, its worn chintz, engraved stationery and imported household help. He treasures what he calls his ''old-fashioned beach house'': a $9 million, 6,500-square-foot villa with two circular driveways and a private beach.Then there is the always-reassuring sight of the neighboring Lyford Cay Club, a pink mansion with Tara-style white columns, where Mr. Hallingby, a managing director emeritus of Bear, Stearns & Company, has been a member for 16 years. He and his friends Sandra McConnell, an Avon heiress, and Bill Paley Jr., a son of William S. Paley and his wife, Babe, appreciate the club's conservative prohibitions. Couples must be married to stay overnight, public displays of affection are frowned upon and bikinis cannot be itsy-bitsy. Everybody still chuckles at the scolding Sir John M. Templeton, the British philanthropist, received for wearing white bathing trunks that went embarrassingly transparent when he hit the water.''It's a very pleasant social life,'' Mr. Hallingby said of this thousand-acre gated resort community 12 minutes from Nassau. Here on ''Lifeless Cay,'' as many residents have called it, there are no stores, no restaurants, no Manolo Blahniks.At least, not at the moment. But the clicking of those sky-high heels is getting closer. The worlds of fashion, celebrity and, gasp, shiny new money, are invading this part of the paradise where the Duke of Windsor once reigned as governor. Where reasonable-size villas once ruled, 50,000-square-foot houses are springing up. ''Who needs that?'' Mr. Hallingby said. He is considering selling up and moving out.Is the last bastion of civilized society in danger of becoming extinct? Like Southampton, N.Y., Greenwich, Conn., and most recently Palm Beach, Fla., Lyford Cay is being invaded by the young and the feckless. And almost nobody likes it.''This always happens to gated communities,'' said Elliott Sclar, director of the Urban Planning Program at Columbia University. ''The middle class always ruins the upper class's fun.'' Especially, he added, when the middle class has money.So habitues of this Eisenhower-era retreat for the uber-moneyed set -- Nicholas F. Brady, the former Secretary of State; the Bacardi family -- now confront party-hearty spillover from nearby Paradise Island. That's where Sol Kerzner, a South African developer, has built Atlantis, a gaudy $850 million resort, and revitalized the Ocean Club, an estate once owned by the Old Guard grocery heir Huntington Hartford. Beaches where Mr. Hartford once sunned in Bermuda shorts now host Leonardo di Caprio, Oprah Winfrey, Michael Jordan and the thong-clad Gloria Estefan.There, Lyfordians complain, goes the 'hood.  ''I have my own set of values,'' said Peter Nygard, an outsider whom some call the Canadian Hugh Hefner. His hotly debated home is a 150,000-square-foot ''hut'' -- a Polynesian village by way of Robinson Crusoe with flocks of 300 peacocks, parrots and cockatoos free-ranging indoors and out, and a lagoon through the house. The spread is growing; he's pumping sand daily to expand his stretch of beach on his five acres.The typical Lyfordian blue blood, ''is afraid to step out of the box,'' Mr. Nygard said, adding ''I'm part of a new generation.''  Indeed, and it is taking root inside the gates, just half a mile from the Lyford Cay Club.  Mr. Nygard, who is a self-made clothing designer and ''is somewhere over 50,'' said he grew up in poverty in Finland, the son of a seamstress mother and a father who worked in a bakery. Now, he is worth more than $500 million.''I have no choice whether to be old money or new money. I'm new money, based on a new set of values, and that's based on merit,'' he said, looking over a stream of purple steam belching from two 40-foot urns.Hospitality chez Nygard is eye-popping, too. Where Mr. Hallingby's housekeeper offers a cocktail to guests, Mr. Nygard offers a masseuse. He has four housemen who cavort on trampolines anchored in the ocean. He has a 40-foot dining room table that drops down to become a disco dance floor once dinner (and bird droppings) are cleared. On karaoke nights, scantily clad young women dance while he sings ''I Did It My Way'' (his favorite song) until 5 a.m.''Nygard Cay is a perfect neighbor for Lyford Cay,'' he said, standing on his beach with a red and green parrot on his shoulder.Some of the rich and famous certainly think so. Prince Andrew and Sarah Ferguson came by two weeks ago. So did Robert DeNiro. Michael Jackson has dropped by. And George and Barbara Bush, whose photograph adorns his office. ''I've built them a presidential suite,'' Mr. Nygard said, pointing to a cabana built into artificial cliffs some 60 feet high. No, the former first couple haven't stayed over.Like his tony neighbors, he favors classical music but prefers to blast it through his compound. Each day at sunset, Cocoy, a houseman, has orders to time the last chord on a CD so it crashes to a finale just as the sun slides into the ocean.Mr. Nygard bought his mother a house a few miles away. He calls it a ''boring house,'' suburban in style, with a portrait of his parents (who were married for 57 years) hanging over the fireplace. ''Men are used to traditional women, but women, they are not traditional anymore,'' said Mr. Nygard, who has seven children with four different women. Not an unusual occurrence even in Lyford Cay, but there's a major difference: only one made it down the aisle with him. As for today's breed of independent woman, he says, ''I don't know how to deal with them.''And Lyford Cay, where rules matter, no matter how outmoded they may seem, is at a loss over newcomers like Mr. Nygard.E. P. Taylor, a Canadian brewer and racing magnate, bought Lyford Cay in 1954 from Sir Harold Christie, a powerful Bahamian developer, for the purpose of creating the ultimate international country club. Then he hired Henry Montgomery of Britain's Bass-Charrington brewery fortune, who had serious European connections, to offer lots to the right people: Prince Rainier III of Monaco, Stavros Niarchos of Greece, Henry Ford II, the Aga Khan.Mr. Taylor ran Lyford like his own private club until 1971, when he sold it to the  members, ensuring that its standards would continue after his death. His dictatorship was replaced by committees on everything from croquet to decoration.Most of the land is governed by the Lyford Cay Property Association. It can put restrictions on new development, but there are rogue parcels whose fate is not governed by anyone. That includes a piece where a developer is building -- horrors -- condominiums. Mr. Nygard bought his prime acreage  through a silent auction, much to the chagrin of club members, who have vowed not to sell him more. Lyfordian property owners say Mr. Nygard's loads of landfill have caused their own neighboring beaches to erode. As for his personal style, it is not in the spirit of the Cay -- well, their Cay.''There's been a building boom in the last four years,'' said Anne Smith of the Lyford Cay Real Estate Company. ''A lot of people have never heard of this place, and many people would like to keep it that way.''They include Samantha Gregory, a Manhattan socialite, who has spent holidays here since she was 8. ''It's like the 1950's,'' said Ms. Gregory, who was born in 1974. Fifties is code for ''really boring,'' she admitted. Still, she added, ''it's a timeout.''She, too, has noticed cracks in the pink-stucco facade. At the club, where she sees the same people who have been serving her ice cream since she was a little girl, she also notices a lot of faces she doesn't recognize. And a lot of un-Lyford-like behavior, too.As one 30-something member of the club put it, ''The newer people can be very aggressive, very loud and really mean to the staff.'' Not to mention, they seem lightfingered. Last year, more than $30,000 worth of towels bearing the club crest were stolen. (The total hasn't come in yet on purloined club-crested glasses.)''It's happened everywhere,'' said Letitia Baldrige, the maven of manners, who first visited Lyford Cay in the 60's. ''Palm Beach certainly. Greenwich. Conn., Southampton. I shouldn't be so regional. The Riviera, my goodness -- when I first knew it, it was very straight-laced, well behaved and well manicured. Now, thanks to the new colony, anything goes -- nudity, sex in public.''Last year, many Palm Beach residents, worried that their own posh sandbox was becoming overcrowded, headed for the rigid structure of Lyford Cay, where club membership has grown to 1,000, from 100 in the 60's. Even if they can patiently handle the two-year waiting list and afford the $65,000 entrance fee, plus $7,000 a year in dues, the Floridians aren't entirely welcome. Old Guard Palm Beach just isn't Old Guard enough for Lyford Cay.''It's getting much more like Palm Beach,'' sniffed Elizabeth Moffett, a septuagenarian who vacationed here with two husbands and is now a frequent guest. In the early days, ''everyone had money, and no one talked about it,'' she said, adding, ''Now, it's who has the most caviar and the biggest bottle of Champagne.'' Her host, who asked not to be identified, said she saw visitors from Palm Beach renting houses in the compound for $5,000 a day. ''They were all overdressed, wearing all their gold jewelry and always asking where the next charity party was,'' she said.Here, life is purposefully low key, in a way that seems oddly normal and strangely suburban given the trust-fund babies lurking behind every bush. People set great store by  the club's greasy hamburgers and slow service. There are family barbecues and limbo parties, and members travel the roads by golf cart.And if you want your hair done, Michelangelo is the only hairdresser at the Lyford Cay Club, and he is booked months in advance. The new people are getting around that problem, however; along with their mounds of luggage (FedEx-ed ahead) they bring their own beauty gurus.''The reason people are fleeing back to Lyford from Palm Beach is because of the infusion of vulgarity that's creeping up from Miami and down from the newly rich New York crowd,'' said R. Couri Hay, a Couristan carpet heir and the society editor of Palm Beach magazine and Hamptons magazine.Yet, Mr. Hay acknowledged, ''it's the only haven of gentility and etiquette and family life left.''Strong words, but perhaps true. Why else would the tempestuous actor Nicholas Cage drop by, pulling up to Mr. Hallingby's driveway in a white stretch limousine accompanied by beefy bodyguards. Mr. Cage was house hunting in the Bahamas, and if the vehicle didn't make his outsider status perfectly clear, his Rodeo Drive wardrobe did: orange pants dripping with crystals, a lime-green shirt and a straw sombrero.Mr. Hallingby said he was certain the actor wouldn't buy. He said, ''We're not happening enough for someone like him.''Not yet.
To the Editor:Every four years during the election campaign, presidential candidates go through the motions of promising to move the United States Embassy in Israel from Tel Aviv to Jerusalem. As you report (news article, May 23), Gov. George W. Bush has ''pledged that as president he would 'begin the process of moving the U.S. ambassador to the city Israel has chosen as its capital,' a reference to Jerusalem.''To the Editor:Every four years during the election campaign, presidential candidates go through the motions of promising to move the United States Embassy in Israel from Tel Aviv to Jerusalem. As you report (news article, May 23), Gov. George W. Bush has ''pledged that as president he would 'begin the process of moving the U.S. ambassador to the city Israel has chosen as its capital,' a reference to Jerusalem.''Once in power, however, every United States president so far has reneged on this (or a similar) promise, citing a host of excuses.But there is a more serious issue than the geographical location of the embassy: Even today, half a century after the formation of the State of Israel, the United States, or at least the State Department, does not legally recognize any part of Jerusalem as being a part of Israel.ISRAEL M. BAR-NIR  Sunnyvale, Calif., May 23, 2000
Political Advice From a ComedianCHEVY CHASE, who became a star on ''Saturday Night Live'' when he lampooned the 38th president (Gerald R. Ford), was reminiscing about the advice he gave the candidate who was elected the 42nd president in 1992 (Bill Clinton). And yes, Mr. Chase refers to the president by his first name.''To me, the whole issue is going to be, as it was with Bill when he first ran, how to be on TV,'' Mr. Chase said the other night at the Chelsea Piers, where he was honored at a gala for the Rainforest Alliance, which works to conserve the world's endangered tropical forests.Political Advice From a ComedianCHEVY CHASE, who became a star on ''Saturday Night Live'' when he lampooned the 38th president (Gerald R. Ford), was reminiscing about the advice he gave the candidate who was elected the 42nd president in 1992 (Bill Clinton). And yes, Mr. Chase refers to the president by his first name.''To me, the whole issue is going to be, as it was with Bill when he first ran, how to be on TV,'' Mr. Chase said the other night at the Chelsea Piers, where he was honored at a gala for the Rainforest Alliance, which works to conserve the world's endangered tropical forests.Referring to Mr. Clinton, Mr. Chase said: ''I used to talk to him all the time when he was on his bus tour. TV is the issue. I told Bill when he started to campaign: 'You're answering questions too fast. You sound like a kid. George Bush is the president. He looks like it and he acts like it. Take more time, take a minute -- or what you think is a minute -- to answer a question. Look presidential.' He would call me and ask 'How'm I doing?' ''So what about this year's campaign?''Right now, Bush comes off as the more competent fellow -- and he certainly has all the money to be on TV anytime he wants -- and Gore comes off a little stiff,'' he continued. ''But when it comes to substantive issues and the two of them debate, I think -- and hope -- that the country will see that Gore is way ahead of Bush.''Playwright Busy; Outcome PleasingThe producers of the Lifetime cable network's version of WENDY WASSERSTEIN's play ''An American Daughter'' telephoned to arrange a conference call last September, when she was preoccupied with her new daughter.''I was in the hospital, had just had a baby, and they said, 'What number are we reaching you at?' '' she recalled on Tuesday. ''I said, 'I've taken an office.' I thought, I'm not going to confuse them and tell them I'm at Mount Sinai and had a baby three months early. They said, 'Will you be available in an hour for a casting conference?' I thought, I don't know, they might be teaching me how to pump the milk, so I said, 'I don't know about that, I might be busy then.' I think that was the day they took me upstairs to see my daughter, so I missed the casting call.''But Ms. Wasserstein was pleased with the choices. CHRISTINE LAHTI, TOM SKERRITT and LYNNE THIGPEN got major parts in the film, which was shown at Lincoln Center on Tuesday. Ms. Thigpen had been in the 1997 Broadway production.Cosby Foundation Holds Fund-RaiserThe comedian BILL COSBY could not sit still during a benefit for the Ennis William Cosby Foundation on Tuesday. Mr. Cosby seemed determined to shake every hand and kiss every cheek -- and there were more than 600 guests.So Mr. Cosby and his wife, CAMILLE COSBY, worked their way through a crowd that included SARAH FERGUSON, the Duchess of York; DAVID N. DINKINS, the former mayor; JOHN F. STREET, the mayor of Philadelphia; AHMAD RASHAD, an NBC sportscaster; the songwriters and singers NICK ASHFORD and VALERIE SIMPSON; ED BRADLEY, a correspondent for the CBS News magazine ''60 Minutes''; and JEANNE MOUTOUSSAMY-ASHE, the widow of Arthur Ashe.The foundation was established in 1997 after Mr. Cosby's son, Ennis, was shot to death while changing a tire in Los Angeles. The benefit, which was held at Cipriani on East 42nd Street on Tuesday, was the foundation's first fund-raiser.STEVIE WONDER donated a song written in memory of Ennis Cosby, and the priciest item at an auction conducted by WILLIAM W. STAHL JR., a vice president of Sotheby's, was a party for 10 with dinner prepared by the Cosbys' chef, JOHN-CONRAD STE. MARTHE.The winning bidder was the lawyer JOHNNIE L. COCHRAN JR., who got it for $15,000.JAMES BARRON with Lena Williams
In July 1948, the Republican presidential nominee, Thomas Dewey, met in Washington with two top advisers, John Foster Dulles and Senator Arthur Vandenberg, to decide what stance their party should take on one of the first showdowns of the cold war: the Soviet blockade of Berlin.Speaking to reporters afterward, Dewey, who had a substantial lead in the polls over the incumbent, Harry Truman, said that the Berlin crisis was so grave that it must be exempt from partisan wrangling.In July 1948, the Republican presidential nominee, Thomas Dewey, met in Washington with two top advisers, John Foster Dulles and Senator Arthur Vandenberg, to decide what stance their party should take on one of the first showdowns of the cold war: the Soviet blockade of Berlin.Speaking to reporters afterward, Dewey, who had a substantial lead in the polls over the incumbent, Harry Truman, said that the Berlin crisis was so grave that it must be exempt from partisan wrangling.''The present duty of Americans is not to be divided by past lapses but to unite to surmount present danger,'' Dewey said. That policy of ''indispensable unity,'' he added, was ''the Vandenberg policy,'' meaning it bore a Republican stamp even though it had been formulated under Democratic administrations.Such words found an echo last week when Gov. George W. Bush sided with the Clinton administration in opposing a measure pushed by Senate Republicans that would have set a strict deadline for withdrawing American troops from Kosovo. He called it ''legislative overreach,'' which, if enacted, would hamper his ability to conduct policy should he be elected president in November. The bill failed, but 40 of the 55 Republican senators supported it.What exactly lay behind this rift between Mr. Bush and the Republican Congress? Important strategic or tactical differences? Evidently not.''What this is about on the Republican side is a deep dislike and distrust for President Clinton,'' explained Senator Chuck Hagel of Nebraska, who voted against the Kosovo provision. It was a candid admission by a respected Republican lawmaker that many in his party have let their antipathy toward the president dictate their votes on issues normally considered above partisan bickering.This is not to say that Congress has no business disagreeing with the president on foreign policy. Legislative consultation is essential to strong, durable policy. There was far too little debate, to cite the most obvious example, when Lyndon Johnson began escalating the Vietnam War in 1965.Nor are presidential candidates barred from developing their own foreign policy ideas. On the contrary, as Mr. Bush's recent comments on nuclear security show, he is willing to state his differences with President Clinton on sensitive matters. But in doing so, he has sent a broader message of continuity, most obviously by appearing at a news conference on Tuesday with Henry Kissinger and Colin Powell, two Republicans who are respected by Democrats. Unlike Congressional Republicans, Mr. Bush seems to recognize the distinction between principled opposition and vengeful obstructionism, and to know how destructive the latter can be.Consider what happened after the 1948 election. Dewey didn't win, of course. Truman did. In their frustration, Republicans embarked on a mission to punish the Democrats. Some claimed the Truman administration had treasonously handed China over to the Communists in 1949. Then Senator Joseph McCarthy accused Secretary of State Dean Acheson and others of being servants of the Kremlin.It was slander, yet senior Republicans like Robert Taft tolerated and even egged on McCarthy's assaults. A few Republicans came forward to challenge McCarthy, but none had the stature of Arthur Vandenberg. He died in 1951, having supported Truman's cold war policies to the end.Democrats, too, have indulged in the politics of vengeance. In 1974 the ''Watergate Congress,'' seething with hatred of Richard Nixon, cut the lifeline to South Vietnam as it was about to be overrun by North Vietnamese troops. If not for President Gerald Ford, who insisted that South Vietnamese refugees be transported to the United States, many thousands more would have been killed or imprisoned.Senator Hagel hastens to assure us that Congressional Republicans are under control. ''If you have a President Bush,'' he said, ''you'll find all this settle down considerably.''But if we have President Gore instead, the Republicans might grow even testier, battling the perceived usurper at every juncture. Will they attack Mr. Gore just as McCarthy and company attacked Harry Truman, not only for his sins but for those committed by the popular president whose coattails he rode into office?  Senator Hagel's words seem to carry an implicit threat: If our guy doesn't win, more trouble will come.Republicans would do far better to follow Mr. Bush's lead, not only because it is more statesmanlike but because history is on his side. In staking out common ground with the current administration, Mr. Bush is aligning himself with Dwight Eisenhower, Richard Nixon and Ronald Reagan, all Republicans who came into office on the heels of Democratic presidents.Despite differences with their predecessors, each achieved triumphs by staying the course of a bipartisan foreign policy. And each had legislative help. If Mr. Bush is elected, he will need it, too. But he also needs it now if the country is to feel confident in Republican leadership. He needs an Arthur Vandenberg. Sadly, he doesn't appear to be in sight.Sam Tanenhaus, a contributing editor at Vanity Fair, is the author of ''Whittaker Chambers: A Biography.''
The best national missile defense requires a bold rhetorical offense.George W. Bush and a phalanx of famed cold warriors brought it off this week. They denounced the arms-control doves seeking to curry favor with Vladimir Putin at the forthcoming Moscow summit meeting as -- hold your breath -- a pack of unreconstructed cold-war relics.The best national missile defense requires a bold rhetorical offense.George W. Bush and a phalanx of famed cold warriors brought it off this week. They denounced the arms-control doves seeking to curry favor with Vladimir Putin at the forthcoming Moscow summit meeting as -- hold your breath -- a pack of unreconstructed cold-war relics.For years, those who dared propose a limited missile defense of American cities against rogue nations or terrorists drew brickbats from accommodationists. Withdrawal from the outdated ABM treaty would upset the Russians, we were warned, and thereby stop Start (the strategic arms treaties).With Bill Clinton's election, a compromise was struck: the U.S. would spend tens of billions in research developing a limited defense against a few missiles from Iraq or North Korea, but one that would not pose a threat to the thousands of Russian ICBM's.Even this half-loaf was to be half-baked. Because the president was skeptical of our technology and unwilling to offend his left by countering the mounting danger, the U.S. poked along with no sense of urgency. Even if our limited system were to work, Clinton never intended to risk Russian disapproval by deploying it.But now, with the C.I.A. estimating nuclear blackmail from rogue states as a distinct possibility, Congressional and public opinion is putting pressure on Clinton for action.His grudging response, outlined in this space last month, was to seek a weak deal with Putin at the summit. Allow us to make minor changes in the ABM treaty, enabling us to put up a puny defense, was the Clinton idea; in return, we will reduce our missile force in the Start III treaty all the way down to the level the Russian military can afford.Senator Jesse Helms saw this bad ABM deal in prospect and announced that amendments tying the next president's hands would be ''dead on arrival'' in the Senate.That effectively exposed the Putin-Clinton dealing on ABM and Start III as a meaningless charade. But it posed a political appearance problem for the Bush campaign. How to oppose the summit stunt without seeming to be obstructionist, triumphalist, nasty to the Russians or, worst of all, subject to accusations of being an unreconstructed cold warrior?Bush's answer: First, trot out the heavy hitters who helped win the cold war. He lined up Nixon-Ford's  Henry Kissinger and Don Rumsfeld, Reagan's George Shultz, his father's Colin Powell and Brent Scowcroft. (No James Baker; forgot his phone number.) One by one, these mainly hard-line heroes endorsed the candidate's call for a limited antimissile system. Kissinger, who wrote the ABM treaty, asserted that it belonged to a long-gone bipolar world.But this performance by the Bush front-line brain trust was played with a remarkable rhetorical twist. Instead of hunkering down to await the usual ''unreconstructed cold warriors'' blast from the White House,  Bush charged the Clinton-Gore administration with being ''locked in a cold-war mentality.''That stole the opposition's clothes. Calling for ''a new era of nuclear security,'' Bush announced: ''The cold-war era is history. Our nation must recognize new threats, not fixate on old ones.'' He anticipated a knee-jerk Gore reaction with a built-in response: ''It is possible to build a missile defense and defuse confrontation with Russia. America should do both.''He then showed arms-control sophisticates he had an understanding of the potential Putin-Clinton summit dodge: ''Start III should not be an excuse to limit our ability to build a missile defense system.'' Rather than let a Russian deal on amending ABM determine the number of missiles in our arsenal, the U.S. military would determine how few are required for our security; Bush would then ask Russia to match the cuts.Bush also made plain what Clintonites know but won't admit: ''This administration is not fully devoted to the development of an antiballistic missile system that will work.''A serious issue is joined. Thanks to deft presentation, the Clinton-Gore side is the one lost in the mists of the old ''cold-war mentality.''
By this morning it was quite clear that the China trade bill would pass, but no one on either side was taking chances.From a stuffy conference room in the basement of the Capitol, about 50 business lobbyists were dispatched, cell phones in hand, in a final effort to nail down the votes of the dozen or so lawmakers who were still thought to be undecided.By this morning it was quite clear that the China trade bill would pass, but no one on either side was taking chances.From a stuffy conference room in the basement of the Capitol, about 50 business lobbyists were dispatched, cell phones in hand, in a final effort to nail down the votes of the dozen or so lawmakers who were still thought to be undecided.A lobbyist for Procter & Gamble, for instance, was sent to see Representative Ernie Fletcher, a Republican from Kentucky. The company makes Jif peanut butter in Mr. Fletcher's district and employs 239 workers.An official from United Parcel Service went to see Representative Robert C. Scott, Democrat of Virginia. U.P.S. has a hub in Newport News in Mr. Scott's district.Representative Van Hilleary, Republican of Tennessee, had his arm twisted by a lobbyist from TRW, which has about 500 workers at an automotive plant in Morristown in Mr. Hilleary's district.''We can't afford to get overconfident,'' said Johanna Schneider of the Business Roundtable, an organization of giant corporations, who was working from the room in the basement, Room HC-8.And despite vote counts that showed them losing, the opponents of the measure were also out in force today. Scores of union members from back home were on the phone, and at least a dozen labor officials from across the country were on Capitol Hill.Art Pulaski, president of the California A.F.L.-C.I.O., paid a final call on Representative Henry A. Waxman, a Democrat from Los Angeles, who had not tipped his hand on how he would vote.In the end, Mr. Fletcher, Mr. Hilleary and Mr. Waxman voted for the bill. Mr. Scott voted against it.They, and the handful of other lawmakers who were truly undecided as the vote approached, were besieged in the last few days, and the pressure peaked this morning.''It's like a big wave hitting the shore,'' said Representative Vito J. Fossella, a Republican from Staten Island, who did not let on until just before the vote that he planned to support the legislation.He said he took a call this morning from a driver for U.P.S. whom he had met at a Boy Scout function on Staten Island last weekend. He was also called by members of the food workers union. The driver favored the trade bill; the food workers were against it.For the first time since he entered Congress three years ago, he said, he was lobbied by rank-and-file workers in financial services companies -- at the banks and brokerage houses and insurance companies -- who live on Staten Island, or in the slice of his district that is in southwestern Brooklyn, and work in Manhattan.''I finally decided, I don't see how voting no is in America's interest,'' Mr. Fossella said.For him and the others who were undecided -- most genuinely trying to weigh the national security and economic implications of the legislation as well as the direct interests of their constituents -- all the attention was exhausting.''I finally let people know today I needed some space to breathe,'' said Representative John E. Sweeney, a freshman Republican from upstate New York.He more or less decided overnight to vote for the measure, Mr. Sweeney said, but at 3 this afternoon he still had qualms and was following the debate on television in his office, ''just to make absolutely sure I'm making the right decision.''As a matter of policy, Mr. Sweeney said, he concluded that ''we lose a little more than we gain if the status quo remains.''''But in the end,'' he said, ''you always vote your district.''And his district, which includes Saratoga Springs and Glens Falls along the upper Hudson River, was divided.He heard, he said, from the dairy farmers and the apple and pear growers and small-business owners who favored the concept of expanded trade with China. And he heard from the paper workers and other union members who feared losing their jobs.Former President George Bush called recently. So did Defense Secretary William S. Cohen. The congressman was given a special briefing by the Central Intelligence Agency. Dennis Hughes, president of the A.F.L.-C.I.O. in New York, visited him on Tuesday.''I've talked to absolutely everybody,'' Mr. Sweeney said. ''It was a very hard call.'' He finally voted yes.Representative Peter Deutsch, a Democrat from southern Florida, dropped out of sight today while he pondered his decision. He took no calls and held no meetings.''I've made myself available to everybody for weeks,'' Mr. Deutsch said. ''Today I needed to think on my own.''He especially thought, he said, about the huge Motorola plant in his district with its 2,000 workers and its hopes of selling two-way radios in China.''There are very few values I would put above them,'' he said. ''But national security is one of them.''Just after lunch, about three hours before the vote, Mr. Deutsch decided to vote against the bill.THE CHINA TRADE VOTE: THE LOBBYISTS
THE DEMOCRATSBARRY LOOMS AGAIN -- Marion S. Barry Jr., once the very popular, very visible and very controversial mayor of Washington, is telling friends he may run again, this time for a seat on the City Council. Though out of office for 14 months, Mr. Barry still has a large political following in the city. But should he run, he faces a couple of major obstacles: the person who holds the council seat Mr. Barry is eyeing has no intention of going quietly, and the present mayor, Anthony A. Williams, says he will support Mr. Barry in just about anything except a return to office. Mr. Barry served on the City Council before being elected mayor, an incumbency notable, among other things, for his imprisonment on a drug conviction. On his release, he was elected once more to the City Council and capped his comeback by being elected mayor again. Mr. Williams, who was elected mayor by campaigning largely against mismanagement and overspending in the Barry era, said recently that he would support Mr. Barry ''in whatever capacity other than serving on the City Council.'' Harold Brazil, the council incumbent Mr. Barry may challenge, announced last week that he was running for re-election so that he could help the city continue its recovery.Irvin Molotsky (NYT)THE REPUBLICANSBUSH ON CHARACTER -- Taking his campaign to a major swing state, Gov. George W. Bush of Texas declared yesterday in Detroit that education was ''the new civil right.'' With Michigan's popular Republican governor, John Engler, at his side, Mr. Bush spent more than an hour discussing the importance of equal access to education with students, teachers, parents and volunteers at the Cornerstone Schools, a private religion-oriented group of middle and elementary schools. ''We can't have any gaps of hope in the country,'' Mr. Bush said. ''The American dream is available for everyone, which means every child must be educated.''THE DEMOCRATSBARRY LOOMS AGAIN -- Marion S. Barry Jr., once the very popular, very visible and very controversial mayor of Washington, is telling friends he may run again, this time for a seat on the City Council. Though out of office for 14 months, Mr. Barry still has a large political following in the city. But should he run, he faces a couple of major obstacles: the person who holds the council seat Mr. Barry is eyeing has no intention of going quietly, and the present mayor, Anthony A. Williams, says he will support Mr. Barry in just about anything except a return to office. Mr. Barry served on the City Council before being elected mayor, an incumbency notable, among other things, for his imprisonment on a drug conviction. On his release, he was elected once more to the City Council and capped his comeback by being elected mayor again. Mr. Williams, who was elected mayor by campaigning largely against mismanagement and overspending in the Barry era, said recently that he would support Mr. Barry ''in whatever capacity other than serving on the City Council.'' Harold Brazil, the council incumbent Mr. Barry may challenge, announced last week that he was running for re-election so that he could help the city continue its recovery.Irvin Molotsky (NYT)THE REPUBLICANSBUSH ON CHARACTER -- Taking his campaign to a major swing state, Gov. George W. Bush of Texas declared yesterday in Detroit that education was ''the new civil right.'' With Michigan's popular Republican governor, John Engler, at his side, Mr. Bush spent more than an hour discussing the importance of equal access to education with students, teachers, parents and volunteers at the Cornerstone Schools, a private religion-oriented group of middle and elementary schools. ''We can't have any gaps of hope in the country,'' Mr. Bush said. ''The American dream is available for everyone, which means every child must be educated.''Mr. Bush said he also believed character education courses should be available in every school. ''Public schools should not mix religion in the classroom.'' he said. ''But we should not fear teaching values that are embraced by all religions.''Nichole M. Christian (NYT)THE ISSUESHESTON AND GORE, ARMED -- Charlton Heston's vow as president of the National Rifle Association to defend to the death the right to bear arms drew a chuckle yesterday from Vice President Al Gore, the association's top political target. Mr. Gore said Mr. Heston and other association officials were dead wrong when they said last week at the association's annual convention in Charlotte, N.C., that he wanted to disarm America. Alluding to the moment at the convention when the Mr. Heston raised a flintlock musket over his head and pledged to die defending his constitutional right to have it, Mr. Gore said in an interview with National Public Radio: ''I have no intentions of proposing or supporting policies or allowing policies that would disarm America. What I have proposed that has upset him so much is a set of common-sense restrictions on the availability of handguns.'' Referring to defending his right to bear arms to the death, Mr. Heston said, ''So as we set out this year to defeat the divisive forces that would take freedom away, I want to say those fighting words, for everyone within the sound of my voice to hear and to heed, and especially you, Mr. Gore.'' When Mr. Heston's comment with musket raised was read to Mr. Gore yesterday, he chuckled.(Reuters)
Top officials of the Justice Department and the F.B.I. engaged in an unusual public debate today at a Senate hearing over a 1996 memorandum about whether Attorney General Janet Reno's job was at risk as a result of the government's high-profile investigation into finances of the 1996 Clinton-Gore campaign.At the Senate hearing, a top official of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, Neil Gallagher, said he attended a meeting four years ago with Lee Radek, a senior Justice Department official, who, according to Mr. Gallagher's testimony, said that he was under heavy pressure on the case and that Ms. Reno's job was ''in the balance'' as a result of the inquiry.Top officials of the Justice Department and the F.B.I. engaged in an unusual public debate today at a Senate hearing over a 1996 memorandum about whether Attorney General Janet Reno's job was at risk as a result of the government's high-profile investigation into finances of the 1996 Clinton-Gore campaign.At the Senate hearing, a top official of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, Neil Gallagher, said he attended a meeting four years ago with Lee Radek, a senior Justice Department official, who, according to Mr. Gallagher's testimony, said that he was under heavy pressure on the case and that Ms. Reno's job was ''in the balance'' as a result of the inquiry.Mr. Radek, who also testified at the hearing, said that he had no recollection of the meeting but that he was sure he had not made such a remark.He dismissed Mr. Gallagher's statement as ''a lie.'' Mr. Gallagher, however, said he was positive of his account of the meeting.The disputed comments were referred to in a memorandum written by the director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, Louis J. Freeh, who was not at the meeting but said that another official had reported Mr. Radek's comments.The disagreement between two high-ranking officials reflects the acute sensitivity within law enforcement circles over the campaign finance inquiry that has resulted in guilty pleas and convictions of lower level fund-raisers but has never reached the upper echelons of the Democratic Party or the White House.F.B.I. officials, including Mr. Freeh, have long contended that an independent prosecutor should have investigated the case because the Justice Department under Ms. Reno, a presidential appointee, could never be perceived as impartial.But Ms. Reno and her top advisers on the independent counsel matters, like Mr. Radek, repeatedly blocked efforts to seek an outside prosecutor, saying the law did not require Ms. Reno to refer the case to an independent counsel.Mr. Radek's public integrity unit in the Justice Department has managed the investigation, which Congressional Republicans have long criticized as a tepid effort.Republican lawmakers have continued their attacks on Ms. Reno -- even though the independent counsel law has expired -- for her refusal to relinquish the case to an outside prosecutor.They have said Ms. Reno deliberately kept the inquiry in-house to spare President Clinton embarrassment and in an effort to keep her job after Mr. Clinton won re-election.Mr. Freeh's memorandum was read at today's hearing by Senator Arlen Specter, a Pennsylvania Republican who has led an inquiry into the Justice Department's handling of campaign finance matters.
Vice President Al Gore said today that the stock market was an attractive place for Americans to invest over the long run but that it was the wrong place to seek a solution to Social Security's problems.In an interview, Mr. Gore reiterated his strong opposition to Gov. George W. Bush's proposal to allow individuals to invest part of their Social Security payroll taxes on Wall Street. And he defended his own decision to back away from his early support for allowing the government itself to invest in stocks on Social Security's behalf. He said that his shift was driven by a recognition that allowing the government to become a big shareholder would create problems and that the stock market had not generated as consistently strong returns as he had once assumed.Vice President Al Gore said today that the stock market was an attractive place for Americans to invest over the long run but that it was the wrong place to seek a solution to Social Security's problems.In an interview, Mr. Gore reiterated his strong opposition to Gov. George W. Bush's proposal to allow individuals to invest part of their Social Security payroll taxes on Wall Street. And he defended his own decision to back away from his early support for allowing the government itself to invest in stocks on Social Security's behalf. He said that his shift was driven by a recognition that allowing the government to become a big shareholder would create problems and that the stock market had not generated as consistently strong returns as he had once assumed.''The learning experience that we went through convinced all of us that it was a bad idea,'' Mr. Gore said of government investment in the market.Tracing the evolution of his thinking about Social Security and the financial markets, Mr. Gore said that he had kept an open mind to many possible solutions to the retirement system's problems when the Clinton administration began examining the issue in earnest a few years ago.Last year the administration proposed a plan, backed by Mr. Gore, under which the government would begin channeling hundreds of billions of dollars in additional money into Social Security out of general tax revenues starting in 2011. Under the plan, half of the new money going to Social Security would be invested by the government in stocks, up to a maximum of 15 percent of Social Security's total reserves.The administration dropped the plan last year in the face of intense opposition from Republicans, revived it in its budget proposal early this year, then dropped it again as it became clear that Social Security would be one of the most heatedly debated issues of the presidential campaign.The Bush campaign has sought to use Mr. Gore's on-again, off-again support for government investment in the stock market to undermine the vice president's assertions that Social Security benefits should not be dependent on Wall Street. And Mr. Bush's aides said Mr. Gore's reversal on the issue suggested that he was prepared to sacrifice principles to make a short-term political point.''There is a growing sense that Al Gore has never had a conviction which he could not easily change,'' said Ari Fleischer, Mr. Bush's spokesman. ''He was clearly on record as advocating and supporting government investment in the market. Now he's walking away from something he advocated as recently as 1999.''Some advisers to Mr. Gore said the vice president had dropped his support for government investment in part to make it easier for him to attack Mr. Bush's approach.But in the interview, on the porch of his home on the grounds of the Naval Observatory, Mr. Gore sought to play down the degree to which he had supported the concept, and said that in any case he had changed his mind as he learned more about the tradeoffs it would require.Mr. Gore said he had been swayed in part by criticism of the idea from Alan Greenspan, the chairman of the Federal Reserve. Mr. Greenspan opposed the plan on the grounds that politicians would not be able to resist using the government's role as a shareholder to favor or punish certain industries or to meddle in corporate decisions.''The magnitude of the government's stock ownership would be such that it would at least raise the question of whether or not we had begun to change the fundamental nature of our economy,'' Mr. Gore said. ''Upon reflection, it seemed to me that those problems were quite serious.''Moreover, Mr. Gore said, he became convinced that Wall Street's ups and downs were large enough to create a risk that the government might be making a bad investment. During long stretches -- including from the late 1960's to the early 1980's, Wall Street was by no means the one-way bet it has often been viewed as in recent years.Although Mr. Gore receives income from some stock technically owned by his mother, he owns no stock, and has never actively invested in the market. He said he had chosen to stay out of the market when he first was elected to Congress in 1976 to avoid any conflicts of interest, not out of fear of risk, and that he supported a variety of proposals to promote savings and investment.But he said investment in the markets should ''come on top of Social Security,'' rather than as a replacement for it. And he said that Mr. Bush's economic policies, including his big tax cut and his need to use much of the Social Security surplus to pay for the creation of private accounts, would undermine the fiscal discipline that has helped propel the markets upward in recent years.Mr. Bush's approach ''contains the seeds of its own destruction by virtually guaranteeing a weaker economy, and thus, you would expect, a weaker market, with lower returns than what we've seen in these boom years,'' Mr. Gore said.THE 2000 CAMPAIGN: SOCIAL SECURITY  Correction:  May 26, 2000, Friday  An article yesterday about Vice President Al Gore's position on Social Security misstated one element of his personal finances. Mr. Gore receives no income from investments in the stock market. Although his financial disclosure form lists dividend income, the stock is held in trust for his mother, and the income goes only to her.Correction: May 26, 2000, FridayAn article yesterday about Vice President Al Gore's position on Social Security misstated one element of his personal finances. Mr. Gore receives no income from investments in the stock market. Although his financial disclosure form lists dividend income, the stock is held in trust for his mother, and the income goes only to her.<br>
Voters may not pay much attention to potential Supreme Court appointments, but interest groups sure do. And the National Rifle Association, the right-wing religious organizations, anti-abortion zealots and other extremist wanderers of the nation's far-right terrain are praying that George W. Bush becomes president and gets to appoint two or three more Clarence Thomases or Antonin Scalias to the court.There are no more liberals on the Supreme Court, just moderates and conservatives. And one important decision after another has been determined by a slender 5-to-4 majority.Voters may not pay much attention to potential Supreme Court appointments, but interest groups sure do. And the National Rifle Association, the right-wing religious organizations, anti-abortion zealots and other extremist wanderers of the nation's far-right terrain are praying that George W. Bush becomes president and gets to appoint two or three more Clarence Thomases or Antonin Scalias to the court.There are no more liberals on the Supreme Court, just moderates and conservatives. And one important decision after another has been determined by a slender 5-to-4 majority.Last week, in a 5-to-4 decision, the court struck down a provision of the Violence Against Women Act that allowed victims of rape, domestic violence and other crimes ''motivated by gender'' to sue their attackers in federal court. The Times, in an editorial, said the ruling ''left women more vulnerable to gender-motivated violence.'' The headline on the editorial was ''Violence Against the Constitution.''Voters who care about civil rights and civil liberties, about abortion rights or gun control or campaign finance reform, about protecting the environment or protecting the cherished liberties enshrined in the First Amendment -- such voters would do well to pay close attention to the possible makeup of the Supreme Court in the very near future.Many of the rights and liberties that Americans have come to take for granted over the past few decades are now in the cross-hairs and well within range of the right-wing extremists. The next president will likely appoint two or three new justices to the court, and possibly four. (Three of the current justices are 70 or older.) And Mr. Bush has made it clear that he favors justices in the mold of Scalia and Thomas, the court's two most right-wing members.People for the American Way, a progressive policy group in Washington, is out today with a new study, called ''Courting Disaster,'' that takes a close look at the opinions of those two justices. It's chilling.The report noted that Justice Scalia and Justice Thomas are ''eager'' to overturn Roe v. Wade, the 1973 decision legalizing abortion; that their approach to the financing of election campaigns would make campaign finance reform ''all but impossible''; that they took such an extreme position on the Voting Rights Act of 1965 that four of their fellow justices determined that 28 previous Supreme Court rulings based on that law would have to be reconsidered if their view had prevailed; that they would prohibit the use of affirmative action, ''even where it is shown to be carefully constructed to remedy past discrimination''; that they ''would have made cigarette companies virtually immune from most lawsuits by completely forbidding any suits accusing the companies of intentional fraud and deliberate concealment of cigarette dangers''; and so on.Last week's decision on the Violence Against Women Act affirmed a ruling by the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit in Richmond, Va., one of the most right-wing courts in the nation. The Fourth Circuit opinion was written by Judge J. Michael Luttig, who is frequently mentioned as a potential George W. Bush appointee to the Supreme Court.The report from People for the American Way does not pretend to be a nuanced analysis of the complex fight for control of the Supreme Court. It is narrowly focused on the extremist positions staked out by Justice Scalia and Justice Thomas, and the way life in the United States  would be altered if those positions were to prevail.Ralph Neas, the group's president, said, ''Two or three new justices in the mold of Antonin Scalia and Clarence Thomas would lead to a reversal of decades of Supreme Court precedent in civil rights, reproductive rights, privacy, separation of church and state, worker and consumer rights, environmental protection and more.''The right wing knows what's at stake. The report notes that Gary Bauer, speaking to a Christian Coalition gathering last October, ''exhorted the crowd'' with the following comments about the court:''Abortion ought to be over. Gay rights ought to be blocked. School prayer ought to be back already.''Two more appointments would do it.
By approving legislation that permanently normalizes trade relations with China, the House opened the way yesterday for a more stable and productive relationship with that country. President Clinton and the Republican leadership also won an important victory for the principle of bipartisan leadership in foreign policy. The Senate is expected to endorse the China trade bill soon. Congressional approval, however, must be seen as a first step toward broadening relations with the Chinese and pressing them to open their country to democracy, the rule of law and respect for human rights.In the end, the vote was more one-sided than many had predicted. The House speaker, Dennis Hastert, and his deputies Dick Armey and Tom DeLay were more successful than the president in bringing along their party faithful, many of whom were persuaded by the business interests lobbying furiously until the very end. Gov. George W. Bush and a raft of respected Republican former presidents, cabinet members and officeholders helped. On the Democratic side, Mr. Clinton got only 73 votes against a tough campaign waged by unions and by the House Democratic leadership.By approving legislation that permanently normalizes trade relations with China, the House opened the way yesterday for a more stable and productive relationship with that country. President Clinton and the Republican leadership also won an important victory for the principle of bipartisan leadership in foreign policy. The Senate is expected to endorse the China trade bill soon. Congressional approval, however, must be seen as a first step toward broadening relations with the Chinese and pressing them to open their country to democracy, the rule of law and respect for human rights.In the end, the vote was more one-sided than many had predicted. The House speaker, Dennis Hastert, and his deputies Dick Armey and Tom DeLay were more successful than the president in bringing along their party faithful, many of whom were persuaded by the business interests lobbying furiously until the very end. Gov. George W. Bush and a raft of respected Republican former presidents, cabinet members and officeholders helped. On the Democratic side, Mr. Clinton got only 73 votes against a tough campaign waged by unions and by the House Democratic leadership.Lawmakers who favored the bill essentially bet that by competing in the global economy, the United States can advance the cause of liberty around the world and help shape international commercial forces to everyone's advantage, including American workers and Chinese democrats. They correctly judged that increased trade with China would not only expand the sale of more American goods there but also widen the circulation of democratic values.Passage of the trade bill will not diminish the need for vigilance over China's human rights problems. Mr. Clinton struck the right note after the vote when he pledged to use China's accession to the World Trade Organization as a way of monitoring environmental and labor standards in China, as well as the rule of law and freedom of expression and religion. He gave appropriate credit as well to Representatives Sander Levin of Michigan and Douglas Bereuter of Nebraska, who crafted legislation for a commission to monitor Chinese human rights as a way of bringing skeptics on board.It will take vigorous action to continue the pressure on China on these issues. There is understandable skepticism about the position that simply trading with China and opening it up to foreign investment will produce a more open society. But a striking number of experts on China, and many in the dissident community in China, have argued persuasively that creating wealth in the private economy, along with more avenues of communication, will strengthen those Chinese in a position to demand a pluralistic and democratic society.The world will now be looking to China to honor its trade obligations, including the lowering of barriers to foreign investment and goods. But in the years ahead as China takes its place among the world's economic and political powers, it must also treat its own people with dignity and respect. The measure of yesterday's House action, and Mr. Clinton's handling of China, should not just be the future state of the Chinese economy but the state of Chinese society.
With his victory today on trade with China, Bill Clinton has finally defined his imprint on American foreign policy: the president who cemented in place the post-cold-war experiment of using economic engagement to foster political change among America's neighbors and its potential adversaries.It is a path he chose in 1993, when 10 months into his presidency he defied his party and pushed through the North American Free Trade Agreement with Mexico and Canada. At the same time, he reversed course on China, despite his 1992 campaign criticisms of his predecessor for ''coddling dictators,'' and concluded that denying China trading rights as a weapon to change its behavior was a policy doomed to failure.With his victory today on trade with China, Bill Clinton has finally defined his imprint on American foreign policy: the president who cemented in place the post-cold-war experiment of using economic engagement to foster political change among America's neighbors and its potential adversaries.It is a path he chose in 1993, when 10 months into his presidency he defied his party and pushed through the North American Free Trade Agreement with Mexico and Canada. At the same time, he reversed course on China, despite his 1992 campaign criticisms of his predecessor for ''coddling dictators,'' and concluded that denying China trading rights as a weapon to change its behavior was a policy doomed to failure.Today, eight months from the end of his presidency -- and with even fewer Democrats on his side -- he convinced a Congress skeptical about trade and even more suspicious about China that normalizing trade relations was the best bet for encouraging political reform in the world's most populous nation.And he persuaded them that rejecting the trade bill would bolster hard-liners in Beijing who are convinced that America's secret agenda is to contain China's power, economically and militarily.It will be years before anyone knows if the economic roll of the dice behind today's vote, or the strategic one, will pay off. On paper, the accord promises vast new openings for American agricultural goods, telecommunications equipment and Internet providers, among others. But history suggests that as soon as China's tariffs come down, new bureaucratic barriers will magically appear.As in the Nafta debate, the economic benefits were undoubtedly oversold. China is already at work on ways to slow the promised influx of American competitors in its market, at least until it can figure out what to do with the tens of millions or even hundreds of millions of workers, mostly in state-owned industries, whose livelihoods are threatened by the country's promise to open its markets to the world.But in the end, Mr. Clinton ultimately prevailed because he was able to sell a long-term vision of how America could use its economic power to change, and perhaps undermine, the nature of one-party rule in China. And his opponents in the floor debate -- both those who feared the loss of American jobs and those who fear China's rising power -- offered no real alternative, no convincing strategy of how America would expand its presence in China or attempt to open up its political system.''This was never a fight about the nature of the problem in China. It was a fight about the nature of the solution,'' Samuel R. Berger, Mr. Clinton's national security adviser, said in an interview this morning as the final House debate was getting under way. ''It's about whether we best deal with China in a punitive way or by a combination of promoting internal change and external validation of that change.''That Mr. Clinton won the China argument at all is remarkable. Few countries evoke such deep emotions in Congress and among political activists.''More people are imprisoned today for their beliefs than at any time since the Cultural Revolution'' in 1966-76, said Nancy Pelosi, a California Democrat and long-time opponent of trade relations with China.While it is impossible to verify Representative Pelosi's count -- the number of political detentions in China is kept secret by the government in Beijing -- administration officials do not deny that the crackdown on the Falun Gong religious group has sent imprisonments soaring.Dana Rohrabacher, a California Republican and defense hawk, charged that America's trade with China was simply building up Beijing's nuclear capacity, and compared Mr. Clinton's engagement policy to Neville Chamberlain's failed effort to moderate Germany's behavior in the 1930's. ''You don't make a liberal by hugging a Nazi,'' he said.But in this debate, Mr. Clinton's approach to trade was as divisive as his approach to China. Despite America's incredible prosperity, trade policy still runs like a huge geologic fault through the Democratic party. For seven years now Mr. Clinton has argued endlessly that international economic development ultimately offers economic opportunities for workers in the world's most innovative economy.Yet he has convinced few.Labor unions fought fiercely against him -- and a pained Al Gore -- arguing that ''economic engagement'' was simply a code word for moving American jobs to China.Just compare today's vote tallies with the battle over Nafta. In 1993, when the American economy was just crawling out of a recession and unemployment had yet to fall, Mr. Clinton got 102 out of 258 Democrats to vote for the free trade accord with Mexico and Canada -- or 39 percent.Today he persuaded far fewer Democrats: 73 out of 211 voting on the bill, or 35 percent. In one of the great turnabouts of modern times, it was the House Republicans -- who impeached Mr. Clinton last year -- who saved his foreign policy legacy today, voting overwhelming for the China deal 164 to 57.The decline in Democratic support is all the more notable since this may have been, in President Clinton's words, the ''most one-sided trade deal in history.'' While Nafta required huge openings of the American market -- threatening American tomato farmers and car-parts makers -- the accord to usher China into the World Trade Organization put all the market-opening obligations on Beijing. China got no reciprocal trade openings, just an agreement to let them into the organization that sets the rules for world trade.''This is one of the conundrums that all of us have had to wrestle with,'' said Gene Sperling, the head of Mr. Clinton's National Economic Council who helped negotiate the deal struck with China in November, an accord that Congress indirectly approved today. ''Despite the growth in our economy, despite the record-low unemployment, you see nothing but increased anxiety about globalization, technology and trade. It's everywhere.''In the end, though, Mr. Clinton's success in twisting arms had little to do with the bill's economic merits. He won over the undecided using a bit of Lyndon Johnson-style vote-buying -- one congressman got a zip code for a small town, and two others got a natural gas pipeline near El Paso -- and a large dose of Richard Nixon's geostrategy.Like Nixon and all the presidents who followed him, Mr. Clinton has become an engagement enthusiast. And while economic interdependence was the course advocated by George Bush, Mr. Clinton has become a far more articulate proponent than Mr. Bush ever was.So if he leaves office with a Clinton Doctrine, it is this: Doing well for American business can, under the right conditions, do good for the cause of liberalization and democracy in authoritarian corners of the world.''We know that trade alone will not bring freedom to China or peace to the world,'' Mr. Clinton said late this afternoon in the Rose Garden, before celebrating what clearly will be one of the last legislative victories of his presidency. ''We will have more positive influence with an outstretched hand than with a clenched fist.''It is a doctrine Mr. Clinton has subscribed to only when it is politically convenient -- Cuba, for example, is still a notable exception.Now the hard part -- making the leap from economic openings to political progress -- will be left to Mr. Clinton's successor.China's record of compliance with trade accords is poor (though Europe and the United States don't do much better). There is little doubt that, once a member of the World Trade Organization, Beijing will use its clout there to work against the international regulation of labor and environmental rights that Mr. Clinton says are so necessary.And while China's intelligentsia sees the pressure to open China's markets as a huge lift to economic and political reform -- and to the country's embattled chief reformer, Prime Minister Zhu Rongji -- the opposition to true market opening will be fierce.China's real political constituencies are its wildly inefficient, often bankrupt state-owned enterprises. As foreign competition pours in, many will go belly up. When the workers demonstrate, the country's insecure officials may well decide to crack down, with echoes of Tiananmen Square that would inevitably inflame American opinion.''No one said this would be an easy path or a short one,'' said Charlene Barshefsky, the United States trade representative, who led the China negotiations. ''There will be setbacks, lots of them. But we've tried the other means of effecting change in China and they have failed. This has a chance, a good chance.''THE CHINA TRADE VOTE
Two important Democrats on Capitol Hill say that Vice President Al Gore's presidential campaign is adrift and can weaken the Democratic drive to recapture the House unless corrected.Representative Charles B. Rangel, the Manhattan Democrat who has been campaigning across the country for fellow House members, said local officials had expressed concern that the Gore campaign had not inspired confidence.Two important Democrats on Capitol Hill say that Vice President Al Gore's presidential campaign is adrift and can weaken the Democratic drive to recapture the House unless corrected.Representative Charles B. Rangel, the Manhattan Democrat who has been campaigning across the country for fellow House members, said local officials had expressed concern that the Gore campaign had not inspired confidence.''People are starting to ask, 'When does he get started? When does he get focused? How did Bush catch up? When does the show hit the road?' '' Mr. Rangel said in an interview on Tuesday. ''They're saying, 'If this is a policy to lay back and wait for the debates, then share it with somebody!' There's no fiery speeches being given; we don't have the surrogates out there.''Senator Robert G. Torricelli, the New Jersey Democrat who is chairman of the Senate Democrats' re-election committee, conceded today that ''there is a problem.''Mr. Torricelli described the problem: ''Until Al Gore actually goes to Los Angeles and receives his party's nomination and campaigns in his own right, he will still be identified by most Americans as Bill Clinton's vice president. There is still not a separate identity, and only the dramatic departure from Los Angeles is going to create this new identity.''Mr. Rangel and Mr. Torricelli, and others in their party, said they were concerned that Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, Mr. Gore's Republican rival, had made better use of the post-primary season than Mr. Gore had. They also worried that the Gore campaign did not seem to be responding to recent polls that have shown him trailing Mr. Bush and losing support among broad segments of the public, including suburban women, white men and every age group except the elderly.In a radio interview this morning, Mr. Gore brushed aside questions about being stalled in the polls, insisting that such surveys this far in advance of Election Day -- Nov. 7 -- are ''notoriously wrong.''''I'm not trying to have an impact on the polls,'' Mr. Gore said on the ''Diane Rehm Show'' on public radio station WAMU in Washington. ''I'm trying to deliver a message to the people of this country.''''But it's not getting across, perhaps,'' Ms. Rehm interjected.Mr. Gore responded, ''The process of communication that takes place in a campaign is not best analyzed on a daily or hourly basis.''He suggested that his strategy against Governor Bush -- which his advisers said was rooted in the compare-and-contrast method he used against former Senator Bill Bradley of New Jersey in the primaries -- would need time to yield results.''I think that the dialogue on complex issues often takes time,'' Mr. Gore said. ''It takes time for facts to emerge, for judgments to sink in, for people to really come to a conclusion about how they feel about the candidates, about the positions on the issues and about where we're going in the future.''Mr. Rangel and Mr. Torricelli said there was plenty of time for Mr. Gore to recover. Mr. Rangel described the atmosphere among his fellow Democrats as one of concern, not alarm. ''This is May,'' he said. ''When the question is raised'' with campaign officials, he said, ''they say no one gets serious until Labor Day.''Of course, elected officials like Mr. Rangel have a huge stake in the party's success in November. If Democrats win back the House, Mr. Rangel is in line to become chairman of the powerful Ways and Means Committee, and broadcasting concern about the presidential campaign this early is one way of nudging Mr. Gore into trying to fix things before they become worse.Senator Torricelli said of the Gore campaign's problem: ''It is both manageable and, I suspect, temporary.''For weeks now Mr. Bush has managed to dominate the race with a policy proposals intended to paint him as a more moderate candidate.Mr. Gore's supporters worry that during that same period, the vice president has appeared more reactive than proactive.Mr. Gore's last major address that drew front-page coverage was on April 30, when he spoke in Boston on foreign policy and raised questions about Mr. Bush's ''cold war'' mindset. Since then, Governor Bush has largely dictated the issues.Eleanor Holmes Norton, a Democrat who is the District of Columbia delegate, said Mr. Gore had ceded the spotlight to Mr. Bush.''His poll numbers flow directly from his disappearance from the radar screen for a number of weeks while Bush pressed the 'on' button and kept himself on the screen,'' she said. Representative Eliot L. Engel, a Bronx Democrat, said that Mr. Gore had not capitalized on his victory in the primaries. ''We thought at the end of the primaries that Bush was all the way to the right and Gore was well-positioned and I had hoped we would see a change in the polls, but we're seeing slippage and that's disappointing,'' Mr. Engel said.''With Bill Clinton, he gets up every morning and wants to meet voters. Al Gore, he does what he has to do, but I don't think he relishes that, and I think people pick up on that. He needs to talk very positively for what he stands for rather than being negative about Bush.''Gore advisers keep saying that the vice president is ''right on the issues'' and that his positions, from tolerance on social matters like abortion to paying down the national debt, are more in tune with those of a majority of Americans. Nonetheless, political analysts say Mr. Gore seems to have trouble articulating that message.Prof. James A. Thurber, director of the Center for Congressional and Presidential Studies at American University and a member of the audience this morning while Mr. Gore was interviewed at the radio station, said that even after almost a quarter century in politics, Mr. Gore still did not grasp some of the fundamentals of political communication.''I thought his answers on Social Security were good for my class in public policy,'' Professor Thurber said, ''but not great in terms of things to take away to a wider audience that does not know all the details of what's wrong with Social Security and whether it's working or not.''The Democratic National Committee, which raised $26.5 million tonight, is gearing up to spend millions of dollars for commercials promoting Mr. Gore's biography -- to convey the human side of a candidate whom voters perceive as someone born in a blue suit behind a podium.Steve Grossman, a former national chairman of the Democratic Party, said, ''He obviously has to do an even more effective job at articulating his values and his priorities and connecting passionately to voters.''THE 2000 CAMPAIGN: THE VICE PRESIDENT
INTERNATIONALA3-11China Trade Bill Passes By Wide Margin in House  Lawmakers voted, 237 to 197, to give China permanent normal trading privileges. A Republican majority that was larger than expected made good on President Clinton's top remaining legislative priority; three out of four Republicans voted in favor of the measure, while two out of three Democrats voted against it. The vote virtually assures the end of the annual review of China's trade status, a ritual for 20 years that Beijing considers humiliating but opponents say maintains leverage over improving human rights.A1Pinochet Loses Immunity  A Chilean appeals court stripped the immunity of Gen. Augusto Pinochet, removing an important obstacle to his possible trial. He faces charges of involvement in the kidnapping, murder and torture of thousands during 17 years as dictator.A1INTERNATIONALA3-11China Trade Bill Passes By Wide Margin in House  Lawmakers voted, 237 to 197, to give China permanent normal trading privileges. A Republican majority that was larger than expected made good on President Clinton's top remaining legislative priority; three out of four Republicans voted in favor of the measure, while two out of three Democrats voted against it. The vote virtually assures the end of the annual review of China's trade status, a ritual for 20 years that Beijing considers humiliating but opponents say maintains leverage over improving human rights.A1Pinochet Loses Immunity  A Chilean appeals court stripped the immunity of Gen. Augusto Pinochet, removing an important obstacle to his possible trial. He faces charges of involvement in the kidnapping, murder and torture of thousands during 17 years as dictator.A1Israeli Admonishes Neighbors  Prime Minister Ehud Barak told Lebanon and Syria that cross-border attacks on Israel following its recent withdrawal from Lebanon would be viewed as ''an act of war.''A8Eritrea Announces a Retreat  Eritrea said it was withdrawing from the land it seized two years ago during its war with Ethiopia. The Foreign Ministry said Eritrean troops would withdraw to positions held before the war started. The retreat follows Ethiopia's punishing 12-day offensive into Eritrea.A5Russia Warns Afghanistan  Moscow said it might bomb targets in Afghanistan if the Taliban-led government there sheltered and aided rebels fighting in Chechnya and other former Soviet republics.A7U.N.-Cambodia Compromise  The United Nations, after months of rancorous exchanges over who should ultimately control war crimes trials for the Khmer Rouge, has conceded to Cambodia the right to appoint one of two prosecutors. Human rights groups criticized the deal.A9World BriefingA8NATIONALA12-27U.S. to Seek Reductions Of Arsenic in Tap Water  The Clinton administration intends to propose strict new regulations of arsenic in tap water, reducing by 90 percent the public's maximum exposure to the chemical, which causes cancer and is found at harmful levels in at least 1 out of 10 of the nation's community water supplies.A20Gore on Social Security  Vice President Al Gore, explaining a shift in his position, said the stock market was an attractive place for Americans to invest over the long run but not for seeking a solution to Social Security's problems.A27Representative Charles B. Rangel of New York and Senator Robert G. Torricelli of New Jersey say Mr. Gore's presidential campaign is adrift and may weaken the Democratic drive to regain the House.A26A Democratic fund-raiser in Washington took in $26.5 million.A26Wiretapping Charges Dropped  A Maryland state prosecutor said a judge's ruling on evidence had made it impossible to proceed with the case against Linda R. Tripp, left, who secretly recorded conversations with Monica S. Lewinsky.A12Federal Building Security Test  Investigators for the General Accounting Office easily gained access to the C.I.A., F.B.I. and other federal buildings using fake police badges and other bogus identification.A17Giving to Charity Rises  Charitable giving grew faster than the economy last year, though not as fast as the accumulation of wealth. Donations rose $16 billion, to $190.2 billion, 9.1 percent above 1998.A12SCIENCE/HEALTHGene Program Scaled Back  The University of Pennsylvania said that the scientist who ran a gene therapy study that killed a patient would no longer conduct human experiments, and that the institute he founded would be scaled back.A20NEW YORK/REGIONB1-15Governor Signs Into Law 2 Environmental Initiatives  Governor Pataki signed legislation banning the use of a common gasoline additive, M.T.B.E., that has polluted underground water supplies. He also signed a bill to limit the amount of pollutants that drift into New York from coal-burning power plants in the Midwest and South, causing acid rain. But the laws potentially place New York at odds with provisions of the Federal Clean Air Act of 1990, and energy and oil companies say they may sue.B1Mr. Pataki imposed conditions on his signing of a bill to require cigarettes to meet fire-safety standards.B5Abortion and the Senate Race  Abortion rights leaders said they would endorse Hillary Rodham Clinton over Representative Rick A. Lazio. Mrs. Clinton said she would make abortion rights a key issue.B1Dismantling of Art Panel Urged  City Council members introduced legislation to abolish the Art Commission, a mayoral panel that sits in judgment over artwork and architecture on city-owned property.B3A Long Way From Home  There have been several Northeast sightings, including in the metropolitan area, of a yellow-nosed albatross, a Southern Hemisphere denizen.B1ARTSE1-12EDUCATIONCIRCUITSG1-16SPORTSD1-8Devils Force a Game 7  The Devils beat the Philadelphia Flyers, 2-1, to even the Eastern Conference finals, 3-3.D1Dodger Suspensions  Sixteen players and three coaches were suspended from three to eight games for going into the stands during a fight with Chicago fans.D1BUSINESS DAYC1-26Reviewing Microsoft Plans  The federal judge in the Microsoft antitrust case seemed to suggest that the government plan to break up Microsoft did not go far enough.A1Analyzing Proposed Airline Deal  James E. Goodwin, chairman and chief executive of United's parent, expressed optimism that the acquisition of US Airways would go through, despite its challenges. Some analysts were less sanguine, and there was skepticism on Wall Street.C1Stocks Halt Slide  The Dow climbed 113.08 points, or 1.1 percent, to 10,535.35; the Nasdaq rose 106.06, or 3.4 percent, to 3,270.61; and the S.& P. 500 rose 1.8 percent.C1Reconsidering Tax Shelters  Corporate tax shelters would be much less lucrative under revisions proposed by the bipartisan staff of the Senate Finance Committee.C1Business DigestC1OBITUARIESB16HOUSE & HOMEF1-20EDITORIALA28-29Editorials: Opening China to goods and ideas; an ambitious airline merger; Mr. Clinton's disbarment case.Columns: Bob Herbert, William Safire.BridgeE7  TV ListingsE11  CrosswordE6  WeatherD7  Public LivesB2
Most people shelled out just 50 bucks, but some could not help giving or gathering $500,000. So there were different ''tiers'' of donors in kind of a class system sprayed throughout the giant MCI Sports Center tonight, but all of them were part of a history-making event: the biggest political fund-raiser ever, raising $26.5 million in three hours for the Democratic National Committee.The Democrats billed the event as a tribute to President Clinton, and the donors, from those in black tie to those in blue jeans, were beckoned by the Midas of fund-raisers, Terry McAuliffe, who, in the end, squeezed 13,625 people into a space designed for 12,000.Most people shelled out just 50 bucks, but some could not help giving or gathering $500,000. So there were different ''tiers'' of donors in kind of a class system sprayed throughout the giant MCI Sports Center tonight, but all of them were part of a history-making event: the biggest political fund-raiser ever, raising $26.5 million in three hours for the Democratic National Committee.The Democrats billed the event as a tribute to President Clinton, and the donors, from those in black tie to those in blue jeans, were beckoned by the Midas of fund-raisers, Terry McAuliffe, who, in the end, squeezed 13,625 people into a space designed for 12,000.Vice President Al Gore, the designated beneficiary of the party's treasure chest, hailed Mr. McAuliffe as ''the greatest fund-raiser in the history of the universe.''Mr. Gore, dressed in a sage polo shirt with his Palm Pilot clipped to his blue jeans, also declared that he would make reform of the campaign finance system a top priority if elected president.Some of those who had come up with half a million dollars for the party included representatives of organized labor, fresh from their defeat on Capitol Hill at the hands of the Clinton administration on the China trade bill.But that battle seemed distant as many in the arena emitted rock-concert-like shrieks when Mr. Clinton was introduced and Tina Turner's pulsating hit, ''You're Simply the Best,'' blared through the loudspeakers.Unfortunately for Mr. Gore, this is the tune that his campaign has been road-testing as his campaign theme song.And it underscored a sad reality for Mr. Gore: As at some of the other joint appearances of the Clintons and Gores in the past, while Mr. Gore is meant to be the star, Mr. Clinton steals the show. ''Four more years!'' was shouted from the crowd as he spoke.Al DiRienzo, 68, a bricklayer from Maryland, reflected the sentiment. He said that he was supporting Mr. Gore but that his affection was for Mr. Clinton.''This is the greatest president we've ever had,'' Mr. DiRienzo said, ''and it's a shame we can't vote for him again.''After Tipper Gore and Hillary Rodham Clinton spoke, the arena fell dark for a video tribute to Mr. Clinton and his administration. It was a paean to overcoming adversity and was awash in sentimentality.When Mr. Clinton took the stage, he opened with a fierce defense of the fund-raising event itself,which was challenged by demonstrators in the arena who, referring to money in politics, yelled, ''Stop the corruption!''''I don't believe that it's corruption to take money to pass the Brady bill instead of beat it,'' Mr. Clinton responded. He went on to say that it was not corrupt to work for passage of other measures like the Family and Medical Leave Act and the patients' bill of rights that have been opposed by special interests who gave money to the Republicans.''I think that's good for America,'' the president declared. ''That's why we are here. That's why you are here. We made a difference, and I'm glad you are here to help us win the next election.''And he offered more intimate musings, including a sidelong glance at his advancing age.Referring to the video that had just unfolded, Mr. Clinton told the audience: ''I had sort of mixed feelings looking at that film, actually. I watched myself get grayer and grayer and grayer, and I thought to myself, before I got into my second term here, I was always the youngest person who did everything. Now I'm up here in my old boots and my old jeans, and I'm just kind of an old, gray-haired redneck trying to put in some good months here.''Mr. Gore also confronted the notion that the event might be inappropriate, but with a suggestion that it would not be repeated.''If you entrust me with the presidency, the good news is that we can all come back here in four years and it won't cost much at all'' because, he said, he is committed to bringing ''meaningful'' change to the campaign finance system.And he did succeed in bringing the crowd to its feet with a rousing campaign appeal that grew in intensity. ''You stick with me, I'll keep this prosperity going,'' he asserted. ''We'll give the medical decisions back to the doctors and the nurses and take them away from the accountants! From the H.M.O.'s and the insurance companies! We'll raise the minimum wage a dollar an hour!''By now he was yelling: ''We'll make sure everybody participates! We'll bring our people together!''Tables for dignitaries were spread across the floor of the sports arena, where guests were served barbecue from restaurants in Arkansas and Tennessee, home states of the president and vice president, along with bottles of merlot and chardonnay. Up in the bleachers, guests had to buy their food at the regular arena prices. A medium-sized soft drink cost $3.75.John Bunting, 56, who works in social services in Baltimore, was one of those in the cheap seats, paying $50 to attend tonight's party. Surveying the arena, he said most people probably came to pay tribute to Mr. Clinton.''It's not that Vice President Gore falls short,'' he said, ''it's that we're talking about the king.''THE 2000 CAMPAIGN: FUND-RAISING
With his recent speeches on Social Security and nuclear weapons defenses, Gov. George W. Bush this month has established a pattern:  He put forward broad ideas with great appeal to the Republican base and then left the details to be filled in later should he be elected.So in rapid succession, Mr. Bush  promised to introduce individual investment accounts into Social Security but left out fundamental details like what portion of the payroll tax he would devote to them. And similarly this week, he opened the door to unilateral nuclear weapons reductions coupled with a missile defense system that would protect all 50 states and many of America's allies.With his recent speeches on Social Security and nuclear weapons defenses, Gov. George W. Bush this month has established a pattern:  He put forward broad ideas with great appeal to the Republican base and then left the details to be filled in later should he be elected.So in rapid succession, Mr. Bush  promised to introduce individual investment accounts into Social Security but left out fundamental details like what portion of the payroll tax he would devote to them. And similarly this week, he opened the door to unilateral nuclear weapons reductions coupled with a missile defense system that would protect all 50 states and many of America's allies.But once again he included no specifics -- or any notion of what it would cost.Mr. Bush's aides and supporters argue that on certain kinds of issues this is the most effective way to lead, that locking into particulars now ensures failure later. Yet it is also the case that the governor's style has some other effects too: It allows him to look like a leader while making it much more difficult for his opponents to get a handhold to grapple with him and his ideas.Vice President Al Gore is the master of picking apart the details of a proposal. Just remember what he did to former Senator Bill Bradley's health care plan in the Democratic primaries.But in the Social Security debate he has been left assailing Mr. Bush's ''secret plan'' and trying to fill in the details for his Republican opponent, as he did today in an interview on National Public Radio. Mr. Gore said the transition to individual accounts would inevitably also entail ''raising the retirement age or cutting benefits.''Still Douglas Hattaway, Mr. Gore's spokesman acknowledged, speaking of Mr. Bush, ''It's harder to have a real debate on the issues when he refuses to say what he really intends to do.''The move toward individual investment retirement accounts and the idea of a missile defense shield have long been dear to Republicans and some of their constituencies. It was Ronald Reagan, after all, who first called for a Strategic Defense Initiative in 1983.But these ideas have foundered in the past, not just because of partisan strife, but because of details. Missile defense technology is still largely unproven. The Pentagon suffered a serious setback in January when a missile fired from the Marshall Islands failed to hit a mock warhead fired from a California air base. And the costs are high.The limited missile defense system under development, which envisions bases in Alaska with 100 interceptor missiles, has been estimated by the Congressional Budget Office to cost $60 billion. A broader system, which Mr. Bush is considering, might cost $116 billion or more.On Social Security, while many  Congressional plans contain some elements of individual accounts like those proposed by Mr. Bush, the details, too, have been problematic. A number of the plans also contain painful medicine like benefit cuts, lower cost-of-living increases or an increase in the retirement age.In one case, conservative Republicans found that the only way to create such accounts and still keep Social Security solvent was to require people to hand their accounts back to the government when they retired and then receive a fixed annual annuity.That is hardly what Mr. Bush has been describing when he says his  plans will allow Americans to build wealth that they can then pass on to their children.Should voters know the full costs and benefits of Mr. Bush's ideas? Anita Dunn, who was Mr. Bradley's communications director, argues that they should -- even if such details could make the plans a fat target in the way Mr. Bradley's health care proposal became.''To the extent that we failed to effectively defend a well-thought-out, comprehensive plan, does not mean that's not the right way to go,'' Ms. Dunn said. ''It just means you should aggressively defend your plan.''Mr. Bush's aides and some political scientists counter that there are some issues on which too much detail is counterproductive to governing. And they point to the fate of another doomed health care plan: the one championed by Hillary Rodham Clinton.''Anybody who announces something initially and provides enormously great detail runs a terrible risk of having it fail because of particular flaws rather than the overall genius of the idea,'' said Ross K. Baker, a professor of political science at Rutgers University.By leaving out the details of Mr. Bush's Social Security plan, his aides say, Mr. Bush will allow Congress to help shape the plan and have pride of authorship. They note that this is how the governor operated in Texas, presenting basic concepts and allowing the Legislature to shape the details.And on nuclear deterrence, they say, detail must be left to the military.''It would be wrong for a politician to arbitrarily set the number of missiles needed to defend the nation,'' said Ari Fleischer, a spokesman for Mr. Bush. ''That's exactly why you have a Pentagon.''Will Mr. Bush eventually have to provide more detail on these issues as November nears? Some supporters of Mr. Bush say no, that what voters want now -- particularly independent voters -- is a sign that a presidential candidate will put forward ideas that may break the gridlock in Washington.But others say he will be forced to fill in more particulars as time goes on or pay a price.''The initial excitement in getting a new idea out is not a measure of where the idea ends up,'' Ms. Dunn said, speaking from Mr. Bradley's primary experience. ''It is early. He hasn't had to debate Gore. And he hasn't been challenged.''THE 2000 CAMPAIGN: THE VICE PRESIDENT
In a stunning victory for the Clinton administration and corporate America, the House today swept aside economic restrictions on China that were part of anti-Communist policy for two decades.By a surprisingly wide margin, 237 to 197, lawmakers voted to give Beijing permanent normal trading privileges after months of fierce lobbying that pitted business against organized labor. A larger-than-expected Republican majority delivered President Clinton's top remaining legislative priority: three out of four Republicans voted in favor; two out of three Democrats voted against.In a stunning victory for the Clinton administration and corporate America, the House today swept aside economic restrictions on China that were part of anti-Communist policy for two decades.By a surprisingly wide margin, 237 to 197, lawmakers voted to give Beijing permanent normal trading privileges after months of fierce lobbying that pitted business against organized labor. A larger-than-expected Republican majority delivered President Clinton's top remaining legislative priority: three out of four Republicans voted in favor; two out of three Democrats voted against.The vote virtually assures the end of the annual Congressional review of China's trade status, a ritual for 20 years that Beijing considers humiliating but that opponents argue is a lever for improving human rights. Congress has approved the trade status every year. The Senate is expected to endorse the permanent measure as early as next month, but may question some of the amendments the House added to the bill.With his time in office winding down, Mr. Clinton threw the powers of the presidency behind passing the measure, which he considers a crowning foreign policy triumph. He met with more than 100 lawmakers face to face or in groups, called scores more by phone, and traveled to Congressional districts in the Midwest and California to rally support.''The House of Representatives has taken an historic step toward continued prosperity in America, reform in China and peace in the world,'' Mr. Clinton said in a Rose Garden ceremony.The agreement slashes Chinese tariffs on a wide range of farm and industrial products and removes some barriers to American service providers, like banks and telecommunications companies. And it puts the United States and China on equal footing as China enters the World Trade Organization, the 135-member trade group that sets the rules for global commerce.Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, the presumptive Republican presidential nominee who has often voiced support for the legislation, hailed the vote. ''Passage of this legislation will mean a stronger American economy, as well as more opportunity for liberty and freedom in China,'' Mr. Bush said in a statement.Vice President Al Gore, who has walked a political tightrope between his labor allies and President Clinton, also voiced support for the bill today, but qualified it by saying that more had to be done to guarantee American workers' rights. ''We must continue our efforts to assure that workers will succeed in a global economy,'' he said in a statement.American companies and farmers -- from Internet moguls in Silicon Valley to orange growers in Florida -- supported normal trade ties with China so they could benefit fully from an accord that Washington and Beijing negotiated last November.Regardless of the vote, China will enter the World Trade Organization. But without the blessing bestowed by Congress today, Beijing could withhold some trade benefits from the United States that it extends to other members of the group.A coalition of labor unions, religious groups, environmentalists and veterans waged a furious campaign to deny Beijing this trade plum, arguing that it wrongly rewarded a Communist government that threatens its neighbors, represses its citizens and thumbs its nose at the rule of law. Unions have also voiced fears that passage would encourage American companies to move high-paying industrial jobs to China.A frantic final round of lobbying, including horse-trading on home-district issues that have little to do with China, corralled enough undecided members yesterday to put the measure over the top. Late Tuesday, administration officials and Republican supporters of the bill said they were a handful of votes shy of the 218 needed for passage; opponents claimed the race was even at 210.But when debate resumed this morning, opponents privately conceded defeat, and what had looked like a cliffhanger 24 hours earlier turned into a solid victory after four hours of largely pro forma debate.Republicans attributed their wide support, which surprised even Representative Tom DeLay of Texas, the chief Republican vote counter, to several factors, including last Friday's agreement by Chinese and European negotiators on terms of China's entry into the trade organization and support for the bill by Taiwan's new president, Chen Shui-bian.Several members of the Congressional Black Caucus followed the lead of an influential Democrat, Representative Charles B. Rangel of New York. Also, Representative Sander M. Levin, Democrat of Michigan, crafted an amendment to the bill with Republican Doug Bereuter of Nebraska to create a 23-member commission to monitor human rights in China, and a second proposal would help fight sudden surges of imports from China. Those provisions attracted about 20 lawmakers who might otherwise have opposed the measure, vote counters said.Supporters said the agreement would open China's vast commercial market to American business. ''For America, this agreement is a one-way street,'' said Representative Thomas M. Davis 3rd, a Virginia Republican. ''Our markets are already open to China.''Over all, the United States bought $82 billion worth of China-made goods last year, $69 billion more than the value of what it sold to China. The trade deficit, America's second largest, was slightly smaller than the one with Japan.Opponents criticized this measure as one that would undercut America's moral authority in the world.''We must stand up for human rights and democracy throughout the world,'' said Representative John Lewis, Democrat of Georgia.  ''We have a chance to vote for the dignity of man and the destiny of democracy.''During the long run-up to the vote, President Clinton repeatedly argued that the measure was more about national security than economic gain. He argued that rejection of permanent trade ties would undercut China's reformers and remove the one firm pillar of bilateral relations, potentially leaving the world's leading democracy and the most populous country on a collision course.But the real fight from the corridors of Congress to union halls and chambers of commerce nationwide cast the lobbying and advertising muscle of corporate America and farming groups against a fervent grass-roots coalition of organized labor, human rights groups, veterans organizations and religious leaders.The United States Chamber of Commerce and the Business Roundtable, two leading business groups, spent close to $10 million on ads -- their largest-ever campaign for a single legislative issue -- and assigned waves of lobbyists to buttonhole lawmakers.Business leaders hailed the result as evidence that they could marshal support for a trade deal despite a string of defeats in the mid-1990's. Many had worried that after the collapse of world trade negotiations in Seattle late last year, the sentiment against globalization would make it difficult to get even the simplest and most economically beneficial trade measures through Congress.But labor leaders denounced the vote. ''This is a betrayal of workers' interests,'' said George Becker, president of the United Steelworkers of America. ''This is about moving factories from the U.S. so that they can export back here.''Fuming about the Clinton administration's all-out pursuit of China trade, Mr. Becker said the Steelworkers' executive board would meet in three weeks to discuss its strategy in the upcoming elections.On Tuesday, Mr. Clinton sought to begin patching up the rift the issue opened between the administration and labor by twice inviting John J. Sweeney, president of the A.F.L.-C.I.O., to join him tonight at a big Democratic fund-raiser here. Mr. Sweeney declined, aides said, unwilling to sit among the corporate chieftains who championed the China bill.''We mounted a forceful and nearly successful challenge to an array of money and forces unlike any before seen in a lobbying campaign,'' Mr. Sweeney said.In the span of a month, Congress has now approved the China bill and legislation to expand trade ties with more than 70 nations in sub-Saharan Africa and the Caribbean.Until now, the administration's last major trade victories were passage of the Uruguay Round in 1994, which created the World Trade Organization, and the North American Free Trade Agreement in 1993, which established duty-free commerce among the United States, Canada and Mexico.Today's vote cut across party lines, as 164 Republicans and 73 Democrats voted in favor; 57 Republicans, 138 Democrats and 2 independents voted against. In the annual vote last year, 150 Republicans and 110 Democrats backed normal trade status for China. By comparison, the House passed Nafta in 1993 by 234 to 200, with 132 Republicans and 102 Democrats supporting the measure.Like many lawmakers, John M. McHugh, a New York Republican, made his final decision on economic grounds after deliberating until the final hours. He said he had been barraged by supporters and opponents for weeks, especially by farmers urging him to back the bill and unions urging him to reject it. Dairy farms and a General Motors plant are among the two largest employers in his district, in the northern reaches of New York State.''I decided that the gains from selling ice cream and cheese outweighed the potential for any job losses at G.M.,'' Mr. McHugh said.  ''It's not a magic elixir, but our dairy farms are really suffering, and they needed this.''THE CHINA TRADE VOTE: A CLINTON TRIUMPH
To the Editor:Martin Feldstein's analysis of Gov. George W. Bush's proposal to allow people to invest part of their Social Security taxes in the stock market (''Bush's Low-Risk Pension Reforms,'' Op-Ed, May 22) assumes that the last 50 years of stock market performance form a statistical basis for predicting the future. In fact, the stock market has been able to grow as it has in part because of an increasing ratio of working people to nonworking people.To the Editor:Martin Feldstein's analysis of Gov. George W. Bush's proposal to allow people to invest part of their Social Security taxes in the stock market (''Bush's Low-Risk Pension Reforms,'' Op-Ed, May 22) assumes that the last 50 years of stock market performance form a statistical basis for predicting the future. In fact, the stock market has been able to grow as it has in part because of an increasing ratio of working people to nonworking people.The real risk to Social Security is that this ratio will begin to shrink as baby boomers retire. Large amounts of retirees' money pursuing a shrinking amount of available goods and services could lead to a collapse of stock market prices and high levels of inflation.The government should search for ways to maintain economic growth during this period, which could include increasing the retirement age, increasing immigration, investing in productivity-increasing technology and encouraging investment in developing countries where population is still growing.ARTURO LASK  New York, May 22, 2000
To the Editor:Martin Feldstein's defense of Gov. George W. Bush's Social Security reform plan (Op-Ed, May 22) seems to disregard the original rationale behind the creation of the Social Security system.To the Editor:Martin Feldstein's defense of Gov. George W. Bush's Social Security reform plan (Op-Ed, May 22) seems to disregard the original rationale behind the creation of the Social Security system.Although average market returns do show better growth than the current system, the problem lies in the occasional statistical aberration of a full-blown stock market crash.Imagine the case of a retirement nest egg in the stock market for a person set to retire in 1930. No statistical averaging would have undone the financial harm that person would have experienced in the crash of '29.Now imagine that everyone in the country set to retire in that same year had held an equal stake in the market. The consequences would have been disastrous for the entire economy.Any safety net involving redistribution of assets into more stable investments during bear markets would serve only to accelerate any sell-off that might occur.STEVE BUZBEE  Highland Park, N.J., May 23, 2000
To the Editor:Re ''Benefits and Drawbacks to Bush and Gore Proposals for Overhauling Social Security'' (news article, May 19):To the Editor:Re ''Benefits and Drawbacks to Bush and Gore Proposals for Overhauling Social Security'' (news article, May 19):The main question I've heard about allowing wage earners to invest a percentage of the Social Security tax in the stock market is, What will happen if the market is down at the time they retire?I share that concern. And I also wonder: What if a worker is forced to retire at an early age because of total disability and the market is down at that time? If a worker dies prematurely, what happens to the surviving family when the market is down? How are his or her payments affected?GERTA CHAMBERLAIN  West Orange, N.J., May 21, 2000
To the Editor:Re ''Benefits and Drawbacks to Bush and Gore Proposals for Overhauling Social Security'' (news article, May 19): The most significant argument against privatizing part of Social Security is that diverting tax dollars out of the Social Security system increases the projected long-term shortfall in the program, leading to major cuts in benefits, increases in the retirement age and cuts in annual cost-of-living adjustments. These are cuts that are typically not fully replaced by any income from a private account.To the Editor:Re ''Benefits and Drawbacks to Bush and Gore Proposals for Overhauling Social Security'' (news article, May 19): The most significant argument against privatizing part of Social Security is that diverting tax dollars out of the Social Security system increases the projected long-term shortfall in the program, leading to major cuts in benefits, increases in the retirement age and cuts in annual cost-of-living adjustments. These are cuts that are typically not fully replaced by any income from a private account.For the one-third of Social Security beneficiaries who are not retired -- people with disabilities, widows and orphans -- private accounts do not replace any of the benefits cut during privatization.These are the central issues in the debate over the future of Social Security that deserve to be fully aired before the election, not after.THOMAS C. MATZZIE  Washington, May 19, 2000The writer is a policy analyst for the Campaign for America's Future.
To the Editor:One criticism of Gov. George W. Bush's proposal to carve out private investment accounts from Social Security (news article, May 19) involves the possibility that a stock market crash just before someone retires could ruin his retirement prospects.To the Editor:One criticism of Gov. George W. Bush's proposal to carve out private investment accounts from Social Security (news article, May 19) involves the possibility that a stock market crash just before someone retires could ruin his retirement prospects.There is a way to minimize that risk: As a worker approaches retirement, he can gradually reduce his exposure to the equity market and increase his allocation to lower-risk alternatives. Since the retiree will likely continue to draw down his retirement savings for another 10 to 20 years, it will make sense for him to continue to have some assets allocated to the equity market, to help mitigate the possibility of his outliving his savings.ROBERT G. DONOVAN  Pelham Manor, N.Y., May 19, 2000
Here is a selective listing by critics of The Times of new or noteworthy opera, classical music and dance events this weekend in the New York metropolitan region.Opera''MARRIAGE OF FIGARO.'' The homespun but attractive qualities of the Amato Opera's productions and the intimacy of its shoe-box theater offer a useful change of perspective for operagoers used to the big houses uptown. The casts here vary: at the very least, the singers are eager and enthusiastic; sometimes the singing shows great promise. And Anthony Amato, the company's founder, conducts the performances with an evident love of the music. The closing production of the company's season is Mozart's ''Marriage of Figaro,'' performed in English. Tomorrow night at 7:30, Sunday at 2:30 p.m. Amato Opera Theater, 319 Bowery, at Second Street, East Village; (212) 228-8200. Tickets: $25; $20 for the elderly and children (Allan Kozinn).ClassicalBARGEMUSIC. There are few better places in the city to hear chamber music than this barge floating on the East River, with its live, intimate acoustics and its spectacular view of Lower Manhattan. Good weather will only enhance the experience, and the performances are often as fine as the setting. Here, in programs coordinated by Paul Neubauer, an excellent violist, he is joined by other fine performers, including the McDermott sisters. (Kerry, a violinist, and Anne-Marie, a pianist, perform tonight and are joined tomorrow and on Sunday by Maureen, a cellist.) The big piece tonight is Brahms's great Piano Quintet. Tomorrow and on Sunday, Robert White, a tenor, performs songs of Beethoven. Tonight and tomorrow night at 7:30, and Sunday at 4 p.m., Bargemusic, Fulton Ferry Landing under the Brooklyn Bridge, Brooklyn, (718) 624-4061. Tickets: $23; $20 for the elderly; $15 for students (James R. Oestreich).BRONX ARTS ENSEMBLE. Carlos Franzetti conducts an orchestra in an annual holiday program in a tent on Sunday at 2 p.m. . The program includes seasoned Americana by Copland (''An Outdoor Overture'' and music from ''Appalachian Spring'' and ''Rodeo'') and Howard Hanson (''Romantic'' Symphony) as well as Mr. Franzetti's own Sinfonia from ''Corpus Evita.'' Woodlawn Cemetery, Jerome and Bainbridge Avenues, the Bronx, (718) 601-7399. Free (Oestreich).ELEMENTS STRING QUARTET. The group, founded last year, is new to this listener, but the program, centering on the fugue, is attractively varied. Inevitably, Beethoven's ''Grosse Fugue'' is here. So are Mendelssohn's A minor Quartet (Op. 13) and Bartok's Third, along with a suite of movements by Glazunov and Rimsky-Korsakov. Tomorrow night at 8, Grace and St. Paul's Church, 123 West 71st Street, Manhattan, (212) 904-1422, Extension 13. Tickets: $15; $10 for students and the elderly (Oestreich).PAUL JACOBS. Students are naturally exuberant when they finally graduate, but this beats all. The day after his graduation from the Curtis Institute in Philadelphia two weeks ago, this young organist began a series of the complete Bach organ works, unfolding over 14 consecutive evenings. Here he presents the last two programs, both mingling chorale preludes with more formally based works, like the great C minor Passacaglia and Fugue (BWV 562), which ends the series tomorrow. Tonight and tomorrow night at 8, Madison Avenue Presbyterian Church, at 73rd Street, (212) 288-8920, Extension 267. Admission: suggested donation of $10; $8 for students and the elderly (Oestreich).MIDAMERICA PRODUCTIONS. This group's presentations could most kindly be called mixed. This concert is typical in bringing together choruses of no obvious distinction from around the country. But the program may be of more than usual interest, combining Schubert's G major Mass (D. 167) with David Fanshawe's ''African Sanctus,'' a 1972 setting of the Mass incorporating African music. Not knowing Mr. Fanshawe's work or the motley performers, one cannot promise more. Sunday night at 8:30, Carnegie Hall; (212) 247-7800. Tickets: $16 to $68 (Oestreich).NEW VIENNA CHAMBER ENSEMBLE. This Austrian group, consisting of a soprano (Joan-Marie Zimmerman) and seven instrumentalists, now two years old, has yet to be heard, so a reasonable level of quality can only be assumed. But it must be said, at least, that the ensemble is adventurous in its programming, juxtaposing composers based in Vienna (from Schubert to the present of Dieter Kaufmann and others) with counterparts based more or less in New York (George Perle, Donald Martino, Perry Goldstein and Edward Smaldone). Tonight at 8, Christ and St. Stephen's Church, 120 West 69th Street, Manhattan, (212) 568-4732. Tickets: $12; $8 for students and the elderly (Oestreich).NEW YORK PHILHARMONIC. The New York Philharmonic is winding down its subscription year with a program including the Shostakovich Seventh Symphony and the premiere of Lowell Liebermann's Trumpet Concerto. The Philharmonic's estimable Philip Smith plays the trumpet solos, and Kurt Masur conducts. Avery Fisher Hall, Tonight and tomorrow night at 8; (212) 721-6500. Tickets, $18 to $77. (Bernard Holland).NEW YORK YOUTH SYMPHONY. Mischa Santora conducts the young players of the New York Youth Symphony in Mozart's Sinfonia Concertante for violin and viola, Stravinsky's ''Petrushka'' Suite and a new piece by Gregory Spears called ''Midnight Pictures.'' Pamela Frank and Andy Simionescu are the soloists. Carnegie Hall, Sunday at 2 p.m.; (212) 247-7800. Tickets, $7 to $40 (Holland).DanceAMERICAN BALLET THEATER. Kenneth MacMillan's ''Romeo and Juliet'' lumbers in this weekend in all its lavishly appointed sets and costumes. The star-crossed pair will be performed by Julie Kent and Vladimir Malakhov tonight, Yan Chen and Angel Corella tomorrow afternoon and Ashley Tuttle and the redoubtable Mr. Corella tomorrow night. Tonight at 8; tomorrow at 2 and 8 p.m. Metropolitan Opera House; (212) 362-6000. Tickets: $20 to $75 (Jennifer Dunning).CHRISTOPHER CAINES DANCERS AND SINGERS. Christopher Caines is not simply a choreographer but also a composer and, this program suggests, a cultural historian. His new evening-long ''Arias'' is a suite of dances inspired in part by the lyrical early European modern dance of the Art Nouveau era as captured in the dance photography of Paul Jsenfels in Germany in the 1920's. ''Arias'' is set to songs by 10 composers including Handel, Faure, Schoenberg, Scarlatti and Gershwin. Tomorrow and Sunday night at 8. Construction Company, 10 East 18th Street, Manhattan; (212) 924-7882. Tickets: $12; $10 for students and the elderly; T.D.F. vouchers accepted (Dunning).WALLY CARDONA QUARTET. Wally Cardona provides audiences with a sneak preview of ''Trance Territory,'' a work in progress. Described as ''a tribal ritual for the 21st century,'' it combines ancient rites with modern technology to affirm dance and music as transcendent spiritual experiences. The program also includes Mr. Cardona's ''Open House 01: Prime.'' Tonight and tomorrow night at 8:30, Street Mark's Church, Second Avenue at 10th Street, East Village, (212) 674-8194. Tickets: $12;TDF vouchers accepted (Jack Anderson).ANN CARLSON. A choreographer noted for her unusual use of spaces turns the entire Chelsea neighborhood into an outdoor stage in her ''Night Light.'' History collides with contemporary life as audiences are taken on a walking tour through the area, pausing in gardens, back alleys, churches and apartments while dancers enact scenes from Chelsea's past; the evening ends at the Kitchen, 512 West 19th Street. Tonight and tomorrow night at 8. Reservations and information about meeting points: (212) 255-5793, extension 11. Tickets: $15; $10 for students and Chelsea residents. (Anderson).KATHLEEN FLYNN AND ALISON BELINFANTE. In this interestingly balanced program by two newish modern-dance choreographers, Kathleen Flynn will address the life and dreams of modern working women in three dances, one inspired by the iconic Rosie the Riveter, and Alison Belinfante will explore bizarre aspects of the circus in six dances that make use of a shared corset, balloon-concealing hoop skirts, a tightwire and crinolines. Tonight through Sunday night at 8. Context Studios, 28 Avenue A between Second and Third Streets, East Village; (212) 924-0077. Tickets: $12 (Dunning).THE KITCHEN: DANCE IN PROGRESS. This annual series brings newish and mid-career choreographers together for two months to create dances in a workshop atmosphere. This year's choreographers and works are Amy Cox and ''Waterfront,'' inspired by the Williamsburg waterfront; Andrea Kleine and an excerpt from a dance about identity and the photographic image; Amiel Malale and his minimalist ''Touch First,'' which explores  time's passing and life's surprises; and Meg Wolfe in a solo that uses movement and video to explore the externalization of personality. Tonight and tomorrow night at 8. The Kitchen, 512 West 19th Street, Chelsea; (212) 255-5793, extension 11. Tickets: $12 (Dunning).NEW YORK CITY BALLET. It was something of a blessing when the New York City Ballet paid tribute to the fledgling Dance Theater of Harlem in 1971. Today the company -- founded by the charismatic City Ballet dancer Arthur Mitchell after the assassination of the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. to prove that blacks could dance ballet -- is a force to be reckoned with. Tomorrow night and Sunday, City Ballet pays tribute again, on Dance Theater of Harlem's 30th anniversary, with performances of ballets associated with Mr. Mitchell's career there, and a new piece choreographed by Robert Garland and Robert LaFosse, who were nurtured by the two companies. Tonight at 8; tomorrow at 2 and 8 p.m.; Sunday at 3 p.m. . New York State Theater; (212) 870-5570. Tickets: $25 to $72; $10 for student rush tickets (Dunning).TAMI STRONACH DANCE. A dancer with Neta Pulvermacher, Tami Stronach will present her own choreography, performed by dancers known for their work with Stephen Petronio, Bebe Miller, Urban Bush Women and Doug Varone. Ms. Stronach will present ''Love Particles'' and the intriguing-sounding ''Two Inch Pedestal,'' a solo about the impossibility of becoming the ideal girl. Sharing the program will be the guest troupes the Flying Machine and the Underfoot Dance Company. Tonight and tomorrow night at 8. Washington Square Methodist Church, 133 West Fourth Street, Greenwich Village; (718) 384-1377. Tickets: $12; $10 for students and the elderly (Dunning).TANGO AND TANGO. Need one say more? Tonight at 8; tomorrow at 3 and 8 p.m.; Sunday at 4 p.m. Through June 18. Thalia Spanish Theater, 41-17 Greenpoint Avenue, Sunnyside, Queens; (718) 729-3880. Tickets: $20; $18 for students, children and the elderly (Dunning).TAP EXTRAVAGANZA 2000. An event that lives up to its name, Tap Extravaganza 2000 will celebrate National Tap Dance Day with performances by artists including Mable Lee, the Silver Belles, Jimmy Slyde and Dianne Walker. Flo-Bert Awards for tap artistry will be presented to Buster Brown, Savion Glover and Leonard Reed. The master of ceremonies is Ted Levy. Sunday night at 7 p.m. Town Hall, 123 West 43rd Street, Manhattan; (212) 252-2927. Tickets: $23 to $52 (Dunning).''THEME AND VARIATIONS.'' Images from ballet, lyrical and full of passion, will be on view in an exhibition by the dance photographer known as Costas. The show also includes dance sculptures by Andrew De Vries, paintings by Douglas Hofmann and acquaints by Roy Fairchild-Woodard. Through July 1. Hours: Mondays through Fridays, 10 a.m. to 8 p.m.; Saturdays, 11 a.m. to 8 a.m. Free. The Gallery at Lincoln Center, Concourse Level just beneath the Metropolitan Opera House; (212) 580-4673 (Dunning).KRIOTA WILLBERG'S ''I, RASPUTIN.'' Kriota Willberg draws from Russian folk dance, ballroom and etiquette manuals, stage combat, silent movies and political cartoons and lithographs from the time of the ''mad monk'' Rasputin. Tonight through Sunday night (and Thursday through Sunday nights  through June 11) at 7:30. Performance Space 122, 150 First Avenue at Ninth Street, East Village; (212) 477-5288. Tickets: $15 (Dunning).Here is a selective listing by critics of The Times of new or noteworthy opera, classical music and dance events this weekend in the New York metropolitan region.Opera''MARRIAGE OF FIGARO.'' The homespun but attractive qualities of the Amato Opera's productions and the intimacy of its shoe-box theater offer a useful change of perspective for operagoers used to the big houses uptown. The casts here vary: at the very least, the singers are eager and enthusiastic; sometimes the singing shows great promise. And Anthony Amato, the company's founder, conducts the performances with an evident love of the music. The closing production of the company's season is Mozart's ''Marriage of Figaro,'' performed in English. Tomorrow night at 7:30, Sunday at 2:30 p.m. Amato Opera Theater, 319 Bowery, at Second Street, East Village; (212) 228-8200. Tickets: $25; $20 for the elderly and children (Allan Kozinn).ClassicalBARGEMUSIC. There are few better places in the city to hear chamber music than this barge floating on the East River, with its live, intimate acoustics and its spectacular view of Lower Manhattan. Good weather will only enhance the experience, and the performances are often as fine as the setting. Here, in programs coordinated by Paul Neubauer, an excellent violist, he is joined by other fine performers, including the McDermott sisters. (Kerry, a violinist, and Anne-Marie, a pianist, perform tonight and are joined tomorrow and on Sunday by Maureen, a cellist.) The big piece tonight is Brahms's great Piano Quintet. Tomorrow and on Sunday, Robert White, a tenor, performs songs of Beethoven. Tonight and tomorrow night at 7:30, and Sunday at 4 p.m., Bargemusic, Fulton Ferry Landing under the Brooklyn Bridge, Brooklyn, (718) 624-4061. Tickets: $23; $20 for the elderly; $15 for students (James R. Oestreich).BRONX ARTS ENSEMBLE. Carlos Franzetti conducts an orchestra in an annual holiday program in a tent on Sunday at 2 p.m. . The program includes seasoned Americana by Copland (''An Outdoor Overture'' and music from ''Appalachian Spring'' and ''Rodeo'') and Howard Hanson (''Romantic'' Symphony) as well as Mr. Franzetti's own Sinfonia from ''Corpus Evita.'' Woodlawn Cemetery, Jerome and Bainbridge Avenues, the Bronx, (718) 601-7399. Free (Oestreich).ELEMENTS STRING QUARTET. The group, founded last year, is new to this listener, but the program, centering on the fugue, is attractively varied. Inevitably, Beethoven's ''Grosse Fugue'' is here. So are Mendelssohn's A minor Quartet (Op. 13) and Bartok's Third, along with a suite of movements by Glazunov and Rimsky-Korsakov. Tomorrow night at 8, Grace and St. Paul's Church, 123 West 71st Street, Manhattan, (212) 904-1422, Extension 13. Tickets: $15; $10 for students and the elderly (Oestreich).PAUL JACOBS. Students are naturally exuberant when they finally graduate, but this beats all. The day after his graduation from the Curtis Institute in Philadelphia two weeks ago, this young organist began a series of the complete Bach organ works, unfolding over 14 consecutive evenings. Here he presents the last two programs, both mingling chorale preludes with more formally based works, like the great C minor Passacaglia and Fugue (BWV 562), which ends the series tomorrow. Tonight and tomorrow night at 8, Madison Avenue Presbyterian Church, at 73rd Street, (212) 288-8920, Extension 267. Admission: suggested donation of $10; $8 for students and the elderly (Oestreich).MIDAMERICA PRODUCTIONS. This group's presentations could most kindly be called mixed. This concert is typical in bringing together choruses of no obvious distinction from around the country. But the program may be of more than usual interest, combining Schubert's G major Mass (D. 167) with David Fanshawe's ''African Sanctus,'' a 1972 setting of the Mass incorporating African music. Not knowing Mr. Fanshawe's work or the motley performers, one cannot promise more. Sunday night at 8:30, Carnegie Hall; (212) 247-7800. Tickets: $16 to $68 (Oestreich).NEW VIENNA CHAMBER ENSEMBLE. This Austrian group, consisting of a soprano (Joan-Marie Zimmerman) and seven instrumentalists, now two years old, has yet to be heard, so a reasonable level of quality can only be assumed. But it must be said, at least, that the ensemble is adventurous in its programming, juxtaposing composers based in Vienna (from Schubert to the present of Dieter Kaufmann and others) with counterparts based more or less in New York (George Perle, Donald Martino, Perry Goldstein and Edward Smaldone). Tonight at 8, Christ and St. Stephen's Church, 120 West 69th Street, Manhattan, (212) 568-4732. Tickets: $12; $8 for students and the elderly (Oestreich).NEW YORK PHILHARMONIC. The New York Philharmonic is winding down its subscription year with a program including the Shostakovich Seventh Symphony and the premiere of Lowell Liebermann's Trumpet Concerto. The Philharmonic's estimable Philip Smith plays the trumpet solos, and Kurt Masur conducts. Avery Fisher Hall, Tonight and tomorrow night at 8; (212) 721-6500. Tickets, $18 to $77. (Bernard Holland).NEW YORK YOUTH SYMPHONY. Mischa Santora conducts the young players of the New York Youth Symphony in Mozart's Sinfonia Concertante for violin and viola, Stravinsky's ''Petrushka'' Suite and a new piece by Gregory Spears called ''Midnight Pictures.'' Pamela Frank and Andy Simionescu are the soloists. Carnegie Hall, Sunday at 2 p.m.; (212) 247-7800. Tickets, $7 to $40 (Holland).DanceAMERICAN BALLET THEATER. Kenneth MacMillan's ''Romeo and Juliet'' lumbers in this weekend in all its lavishly appointed sets and costumes. The star-crossed pair will be performed by Julie Kent and Vladimir Malakhov tonight, Yan Chen and Angel Corella tomorrow afternoon and Ashley Tuttle and the redoubtable Mr. Corella tomorrow night. Tonight at 8; tomorrow at 2 and 8 p.m. Metropolitan Opera House; (212) 362-6000. Tickets: $20 to $75 (Jennifer Dunning).CHRISTOPHER CAINES DANCERS AND SINGERS. Christopher Caines is not simply a choreographer but also a composer and, this program suggests, a cultural historian. His new evening-long ''Arias'' is a suite of dances inspired in part by the lyrical early European modern dance of the Art Nouveau era as captured in the dance photography of Paul Jsenfels in Germany in the 1920's. ''Arias'' is set to songs by 10 composers including Handel, Faure, Schoenberg, Scarlatti and Gershwin. Tomorrow and Sunday night at 8. Construction Company, 10 East 18th Street, Manhattan; (212) 924-7882. Tickets: $12; $10 for students and the elderly; T.D.F. vouchers accepted (Dunning).WALLY CARDONA QUARTET. Wally Cardona provides audiences with a sneak preview of ''Trance Territory,'' a work in progress. Described as ''a tribal ritual for the 21st century,'' it combines ancient rites with modern technology to affirm dance and music as transcendent spiritual experiences. The program also includes Mr. Cardona's ''Open House 01: Prime.'' Tonight and tomorrow night at 8:30, Street Mark's Church, Second Avenue at 10th Street, East Village, (212) 674-8194. Tickets: $12;TDF vouchers accepted (Jack Anderson).ANN CARLSON. A choreographer noted for her unusual use of spaces turns the entire Chelsea neighborhood into an outdoor stage in her ''Night Light.'' History collides with contemporary life as audiences are taken on a walking tour through the area, pausing in gardens, back alleys, churches and apartments while dancers enact scenes from Chelsea's past; the evening ends at the Kitchen, 512 West 19th Street. Tonight and tomorrow night at 8. Reservations and information about meeting points: (212) 255-5793, extension 11. Tickets: $15; $10 for students and Chelsea residents. (Anderson).KATHLEEN FLYNN AND ALISON BELINFANTE. In this interestingly balanced program by two newish modern-dance choreographers, Kathleen Flynn will address the life and dreams of modern working women in three dances, one inspired by the iconic Rosie the Riveter, and Alison Belinfante will explore bizarre aspects of the circus in six dances that make use of a shared corset, balloon-concealing hoop skirts, a tightwire and crinolines. Tonight through Sunday night at 8. Context Studios, 28 Avenue A between Second and Third Streets, East Village; (212) 924-0077. Tickets: $12 (Dunning).THE KITCHEN: DANCE IN PROGRESS. This annual series brings newish and mid-career choreographers together for two months to create dances in a workshop atmosphere. This year's choreographers and works are Amy Cox and ''Waterfront,'' inspired by the Williamsburg waterfront; Andrea Kleine and an excerpt from a dance about identity and the photographic image; Amiel Malale and his minimalist ''Touch First,'' which explores  time's passing and life's surprises; and Meg Wolfe in a solo that uses movement and video to explore the externalization of personality. Tonight and tomorrow night at 8. The Kitchen, 512 West 19th Street, Chelsea; (212) 255-5793, extension 11. Tickets: $12 (Dunning).NEW YORK CITY BALLET. It was something of a blessing when the New York City Ballet paid tribute to the fledgling Dance Theater of Harlem in 1971. Today the company -- founded by the charismatic City Ballet dancer Arthur Mitchell after the assassination of the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. to prove that blacks could dance ballet -- is a force to be reckoned with. Tomorrow night and Sunday, City Ballet pays tribute again, on Dance Theater of Harlem's 30th anniversary, with performances of ballets associated with Mr. Mitchell's career there, and a new piece choreographed by Robert Garland and Robert LaFosse, who were nurtured by the two companies. Tonight at 8; tomorrow at 2 and 8 p.m.; Sunday at 3 p.m. . New York State Theater; (212) 870-5570. Tickets: $25 to $72; $10 for student rush tickets (Dunning).TAMI STRONACH DANCE. A dancer with Neta Pulvermacher, Tami Stronach will present her own choreography, performed by dancers known for their work with Stephen Petronio, Bebe Miller, Urban Bush Women and Doug Varone. Ms. Stronach will present ''Love Particles'' and the intriguing-sounding ''Two Inch Pedestal,'' a solo about the impossibility of becoming the ideal girl. Sharing the program will be the guest troupes the Flying Machine and the Underfoot Dance Company. Tonight and tomorrow night at 8. Washington Square Methodist Church, 133 West Fourth Street, Greenwich Village; (718) 384-1377. Tickets: $12; $10 for students and the elderly (Dunning).TANGO AND TANGO. Need one say more? Tonight at 8; tomorrow at 3 and 8 p.m.; Sunday at 4 p.m. Through June 18. Thalia Spanish Theater, 41-17 Greenpoint Avenue, Sunnyside, Queens; (718) 729-3880. Tickets: $20; $18 for students, children and the elderly (Dunning).TAP EXTRAVAGANZA 2000. An event that lives up to its name, Tap Extravaganza 2000 will celebrate National Tap Dance Day with performances by artists including Mable Lee, the Silver Belles, Jimmy Slyde and Dianne Walker. Flo-Bert Awards for tap artistry will be presented to Buster Brown, Savion Glover and Leonard Reed. The master of ceremonies is Ted Levy. Sunday night at 7 p.m. Town Hall, 123 West 43rd Street, Manhattan; (212) 252-2927. Tickets: $23 to $52 (Dunning).''THEME AND VARIATIONS.'' Images from ballet, lyrical and full of passion, will be on view in an exhibition by the dance photographer known as Costas. The show also includes dance sculptures by Andrew De Vries, paintings by Douglas Hofmann and acquaints by Roy Fairchild-Woodard. Through July 1. Hours: Mondays through Fridays, 10 a.m. to 8 p.m.; Saturdays, 11 a.m. to 8 a.m. Free. The Gallery at Lincoln Center, Concourse Level just beneath the Metropolitan Opera House; (212) 580-4673 (Dunning).KRIOTA WILLBERG'S ''I, RASPUTIN.'' Kriota Willberg draws from Russian folk dance, ballroom and etiquette manuals, stage combat, silent movies and political cartoons and lithographs from the time of the ''mad monk'' Rasputin. Tonight through Sunday night (and Thursday through Sunday nights  through June 11) at 7:30. Performance Space 122, 150 First Avenue at Ninth Street, East Village; (212) 477-5288. Tickets: $15 (Dunning).
To the Editor:A May 19 front-page article portrays Tipper Gore as someone who seeks privacy. Yet she is also said to be a woman who humbly joins with other mothers against gun violence, seeks out the homeless at night and speaks to parents of gays (and, indeed, all parents) about the need for unconditional love.Is Mrs. Gore a woman who retreats from public scrutiny or, in fact, a woman who embodies the struggles so many women face today: balancing work, promoting social justice and, most important, caring for their families?To the Editor:A May 19 front-page article portrays Tipper Gore as someone who seeks privacy. Yet she is also said to be a woman who humbly joins with other mothers against gun violence, seeks out the homeless at night and speaks to parents of gays (and, indeed, all parents) about the need for unconditional love.Is Mrs. Gore a woman who retreats from public scrutiny or, in fact, a woman who embodies the struggles so many women face today: balancing work, promoting social justice and, most important, caring for their families?Must we categorize Mrs. Gore as traditional or elusive, or can we appreciate her as a woman empowered with individuality, passion and loyalty?MARY  FENZEL  Ridgewood, N.J., May 20, 2000
George W. Bush is advocating radical change in Social Security, which he himself calls ''the single most successful government program in American history.'' He would take a part of the payroll tax that now flows to the Social Security trust fund and divert it to personal savings accounts.But doing so would seriously undermine the finances of the present Social Security system. It would subject Americans, especially financially unsophisticated ones, to large additional risks. And it would abandon the noble commitment to social insurance that this country made in 1935.George W. Bush is advocating radical change in Social Security, which he himself calls ''the single most successful government program in American history.'' He would take a part of the payroll tax that now flows to the Social Security trust fund and divert it to personal savings accounts.But doing so would seriously undermine the finances of the present Social Security system. It would subject Americans, especially financially unsophisticated ones, to large additional risks. And it would abandon the noble commitment to social insurance that this country made in 1935.While Social Security is a great success, its current large surplus masks a serious long-term financing problem.  Simply put, we have promised far more in future benefits than future payroll tax receipts are likely to finance -- about 14 percent more on average over the next 75 years, according to the Social Security trustees' estimates. This is a huge hole that must be filled by some combination of raising payroll taxes, cutting benefits and infusing general revenue into the trust fund.With the system in need of more revenue, not less, diverting part of the payroll tax into private accounts, as Mr. Bush proposes, appears irresponsible, unless, of course, you make up the difference by cutting benefits. Without such cuts, privatization would dig the financing hole even deeper, which is why thoughtful privatization proposals generally include significant tax increases to make good on promises that have already been made. But Mr. Bush has not proposed any. This is no minor omission. Diverting 2 percentage points of the payroll tax into individual accounts would drain trillions of dollars from Social Security over the next quarter-century.And that's just the beginning.The Bush plan not only would imperil Social Security's finances, but would add new elements of cost and risk to the retirement security of millions of Americans. Privatization is superficially attractive for two main reasons: the higher returns that can presumably be earned, say, in the stock market, and the virtues of individual choice. That's all well and good for financially sophisticated Americans, who happen (by no coincidence) also to enjoy every other advantage in our society, and who, by the way, do not rely heavily on Social Security for their retirement income. But what about the less fortunate citizens, the ones who will need to live on their Social Security checks but who may not know the difference between a stock and a bond?Is freedom of choice such a blessing for them? Will they understand the risks to which they may be exposed? When funds are invested in stocks and held to retirement, the accumulated balance at retirement is as volatile as the stock market, which not so infrequently moves up or down by 50 percent or more within a few years.It is a cruel illusion to pretend that small individual accounts will enjoy the full returns that people see in the stock market. There are commissions and, even more important, management fees that can easily exceed 1 percent of assets per year. Then, when they retire, people will discover that buying an individual (as opposed to a group) annuity eats up another chunk of the money, whereas Social Security offers annuities automatically and at zero cost. Furthermore, Social Security's annuities are protected from inflation, whereas private ones are not.Finally, let's remember the central idea behind the Social Security system: to provide social insurance. Both words matter. High-wage earners like me would undoubtedly be better off under the Bush proposal, and even better off under full privatization. After all, universal social insurance forces us to remain in the same pool with, and partially subsidize, those who are less fortunate. Social Security's benefit formula offers a better rate of return to lower-wage individuals.From a self-interested point of view, that's a bad deal for us high-income people. Were Vanguard or Fidelity to offer me a mutual fund like that, I wouldn't buy any. But people like me cannot opt out of Social Security, and frankly, I don't want to. Universal social insurance is one of those precious ties that bind our society together. Privatization, whether partial or total, would weaken that tie.Alan S. Blinder, a professor of economics at Princeton and visiting fellow at the Brookings Institution, is an adviser to the Gore campaign.
The Justice Department said today that it was sending George A. Stamboulidis, a respected prosecutor from Long Island who is experienced in organized crime and public corruption cases, to lead the prosecution of the scientist accused of illegally downloading highly sensitive nuclear weapons secrets at the Los Alamos National Laboratory.Mr. Stamboulidis, who successfully prosecuted a number of organized crime figures in the Genovese, Colombo and Luchese crime families, will take over from Bob Gorence, an assistant United States attorney in Albuquerque, where the scientist, Wen Ho Lee, will be tried.The Justice Department said today that it was sending George A. Stamboulidis, a respected prosecutor from Long Island who is experienced in organized crime and public corruption cases, to lead the prosecution of the scientist accused of illegally downloading highly sensitive nuclear weapons secrets at the Los Alamos National Laboratory.Mr. Stamboulidis, who successfully prosecuted a number of organized crime figures in the Genovese, Colombo and Luchese crime families, will take over from Bob Gorence, an assistant United States attorney in Albuquerque, where the scientist, Wen Ho Lee, will be tried.Officials said several weeks ago that Mr. Gorence was being replaced as the lead prosecutor, but they have not said why. Patricia Chavez, a spokesman for the United States attorney's office in Albuquerque, said only that Mr. Gorence would remain one of the prosecutors on the case. Mr. Gorence could not be reached for comment today.It is somewhat unusual for the government to switch lead prosecutors so late in a case. Mr. Lee was indicted last December; his trial, which is expected to be highly complex and involve large volumes of classified information on thermonuclear weapons technology, is scheduled for early November.Mr. Lee is charged with improperly downloading a vast quantity of classified data with the intention of providing it to a foreign country. Although he was investigated for years on suspicion of passing secrets to China, he is not charged with espionage or with actually handing over any classified data to anyone else. Mr. Lee has denied the charges.Two important hearings will be held in the coming weeks, and Mr. Lee's lawyers have said they will resist any delays because Mr. Lee is being held in jail without bail.A hearing is scheduled for June 7 on the defense's challenge of the original search warrant used to gather evidence from Mr. Lee's home. And the United States district judge overseeing the case, John Edwards Conway, has set June 12 as the date for what could prove to be a crucial hearing: the defense's request that all the classified data Mr. Lee is accused of improperly downloading be admitted as evidence in the trial.The defense has said it will try to show that the data was, in most instances, either already available publicly or useless without other codes and equipment. The government is expected to argue that, for national security reasons, the information must be kept confidential.If the judge rules that the data is admissible, the government would have to decide whether to allow its release or potentially to drop the charges. If the judge denies the request, it could force a major reconsideration of the defense strategy.Mr. Stamboulidis recently succeeded in the prosecution of the head of the Republican Party in Suffolk County, John Powell, but does not have extensive experience with national security issues.Alan Vinegrad, the chief assistant United States attorney for the Eastern District of New York, who supervises Mr. Stamboulidis, said he did not believe that would matter because of Mr. Stamboulidis's extensive trial experience with complex cases.''He is a superb prosecutor and trial lawyer,'' Mr. Vinegrad said. ''He's a quick study.''
It seems fitting that the first presidential campaign of the new century should confront the most dangerous military legacy of the last century, nuclear arms. Gov. George W. Bush and Vice President Al Gore initiated an important and healthy debate in recent days about how best to reduce nuclear arsenals and diminish the threat of an accidental or intentional nuclear conflict. America's security will be best protected if the next president moves boldly to cut nuclear arms without suddenly overturning the carefully calibrated balance between offensive and defensive weapons that has long been central to preserving the peace.Mr. Bush, like Ronald Reagan in the 1980's, is impatient with the balance. The impulse is understandable. The primary deterrent to war is the chilling notion of mutual assured destruction, which requires Washington and Moscow to maintain sufficient nuclear firepower to annihilate one another. That balance of terror has always been unsettling and should be supplanted by a less threatening calculus. Placing a greater emphasis on defensive systems, as Mr. Bush proposes, is alluring.It seems fitting that the first presidential campaign of the new century should confront the most dangerous military legacy of the last century, nuclear arms. Gov. George W. Bush and Vice President Al Gore initiated an important and healthy debate in recent days about how best to reduce nuclear arsenals and diminish the threat of an accidental or intentional nuclear conflict. America's security will be best protected if the next president moves boldly to cut nuclear arms without suddenly overturning the carefully calibrated balance between offensive and defensive weapons that has long been central to preserving the peace.Mr. Bush, like Ronald Reagan in the 1980's, is impatient with the balance. The impulse is understandable. The primary deterrent to war is the chilling notion of mutual assured destruction, which requires Washington and Moscow to maintain sufficient nuclear firepower to annihilate one another. That balance of terror has always been unsettling and should be supplanted by a less threatening calculus. Placing a greater emphasis on defensive systems, as Mr. Bush proposes, is alluring.But there are disabling problems with Mr. Bush's desire to make an antimissile shield a centerpiece of his nuclear strategy. For one thing, the technology to destroy even a handful of incoming warheads in outer space remains elusive. Intercepting just one warhead has proved difficult in recent tests. For another, an abrupt shift to defensive strategies would invite Moscow to increase its nuclear arsenal to ensure that it could overwhelm even a limited American antimissile system.Though such matters of nuclear theology may seem anachronistic eight years after the disintegration of the Soviet Union, they cannot be escaped. Even at a time of cooperation, the United States and Russia possess thousands of nuclear weapons that must be responsibly managed. It is in neither nation's interest to make the other feel less secure.But that is just the risk that Mr. Bush takes by emphasizing the immediate development of a robust antimissile defense. Apart from questions of cost and technology -- the United States has already wasted billions of dollars chasing this goal -- Mr. Bush's approach will tempt Washington to break out of the 1972 Antiballistic Missile Treaty. The pact limits the defensive systems that Washington and Moscow can construct. An American breakout would unravel the arms control work of six presidents, and encourage China to join a new arms race to overcome the shield.Even Mr. Bush's own arms reduction proposals would be threatened. Many of the ideas he presented this week were constructive and creative. Mr. Bush made clear his commitment to seek deeper cuts than those provided under the last arms reduction treaty. The 1993 agreement requires Washington and Moscow to slash the number of long-range warheads from roughly 6,000 on each side to half that count. Mr. Bush seemed comfortable with eventually leaving each country with 2,000 to 2,500 long-range weapons. Drawing on the positive example his father set as president, Mr. Bush also said he would consider eliminating some American missiles and lowering the alert status of others on his own to encourage Moscow to respond in kind.Given the potential threat of a missile attack from rogue nations like North Korea, the United States should be seeking to develop a limited defensive system against such an assault, which the Clinton administration is doing. But Washington must proceed with care by working with Moscow to reopen the ABM treaty rather than withdrawing from it. The next president should avoid reliance on expensive and unworkable antimissile technologies and not take steps that would lead Russia to rearm.
Gov. George W. Bush may be a fun date, but he's not the kind of guy you want to settle down with. So says the chairwoman of the Texas Democratic Party, Molly Beth Malcolm, one of more than 70 Democratic officials from 34 states who met here today with Vice President Al Gore and his senior campaign staff.Although Mr. Gore has been lagging Mr. Bush in the public opinion polls, the meeting was not an emergency session but a long-planned chance for the campaign to coordinate with its state emissaries. Many left the impression that they were not worried about an election more than five months away, although they were trying to prepare for it.Gov. George W. Bush may be a fun date, but he's not the kind of guy you want to settle down with. So says the chairwoman of the Texas Democratic Party, Molly Beth Malcolm, one of more than 70 Democratic officials from 34 states who met here today with Vice President Al Gore and his senior campaign staff.Although Mr. Gore has been lagging Mr. Bush in the public opinion polls, the meeting was not an emergency session but a long-planned chance for the campaign to coordinate with its state emissaries. Many left the impression that they were not worried about an election more than five months away, although they were trying to prepare for it.''One of the basic tenets of politics,'' said Paul Berendt, Democratic chairman in Washington State, ''is that you don't fight the battle in May that you need to fight in October.''The state officials said they recognized that voters seemed to like Mr. Bush's personality more than Mr. Gore's, but they suggested that the more voters saw of Mr. Bush, the less they would like him.Ms. Malcolm put it most graphically: ''He's the guy you want to go to the ballgame with, he's the guy you want to come to your party because he's going to be lots of fun. But it reminds me of when I was in college. There were lots of guys who were lots of fun to go out with, and you wanted them at your party, but when it came time to settle down, he wasn't the one you're looking for.''Later, for the first time in quite a few weeks, Mr. Gore referred to his vanquished Democratic primary foe, former Senator Bill Bradley, with some graciousness, a hint that the icy relationship between them might be beginning to thaw.''One of our greatest challenges, as Bill Bradley so eloquently said during the primaries, is that we need to bring our people together,'' Mr. Gore said at a low-key fund-raising reception tonight in calling for anti-hate-crime legislation.THE 2000 CAMPAIGN: THE VICE PRESIDENT
Faced with a new warning by a prominent religious conservative against selecting a running mate who supports a right to abortion, Gov. George W. Bush today called himself ''a pretty independent thinker'' whose main criterion for a vice-presidential nominee was an ability to assume the presidency.Mr. Bush spoke of his vice-presidential search as he stood beside Colin L. Powell, the retired general and Republican dream candidate who refuses to seek elective office. General Powell, prompted by reporters' questions, repeated his wish to see the anti-abortion plank removed from the Republican platform. And he once again said he would not be interested in being Mr. Bush's running mate.Faced with a new warning by a prominent religious conservative against selecting a running mate who supports a right to abortion, Gov. George W. Bush today called himself ''a pretty independent thinker'' whose main criterion for a vice-presidential nominee was an ability to assume the presidency.Mr. Bush spoke of his vice-presidential search as he stood beside Colin L. Powell, the retired general and Republican dream candidate who refuses to seek elective office. General Powell, prompted by reporters' questions, repeated his wish to see the anti-abortion plank removed from the Republican platform. And he once again said he would not be interested in being Mr. Bush's running mate.''I am not a candidate for the vice presidency, and I'm not seeking it,'' he said. ''The governor knows that.'' But he left the door open to a cabinet post. ''In any other capacity,'' he said, ''one has to listen when the president asks you to consider a job.''The day's event had not been devised for talk of abortion politics. In the garden of the Governor's Mansion, Mr. Bush and General Powell  signed an agreement in which Texas and America's Promise, the general's volunteer group to help the nation's youth, vowed to work together.But the subsequent news conference quickly turned to the jousting inside the Republican Party over Mr. Bush's choice of a running mate, just a day after the religious conservative James C. Dobson told reporters that Mr. Bush ''sounds a whole lot more conservative when he is talking to conservatives and a whole lot more moderate when he is talking to moderates.''Dr. Dobson accused Mr. Bush of sacrificing the party's core principles and called on him to choose a running mate opposed to abortion.''The base in the Republican Party is pro-life,'' Dr. Dobson said. ''You can't have it all, and you can't win without that base.''Asked his response, Mr. Bush gave neither a nod to Dr. Dobson's concerns nor a hint where his running mate would stand on abortion. ''I appreciate advice,'' the governor said. ''I'm getting it from all corners. But I'm a pretty independent thinker.'' And, he said, his political message is always consistent. ''It's basically this: we're going to trust people, not government,'' he said.Pressed several times on whether he was listening to either conservatives or abortion-rights Republicans about the choice of a vice-presidential nominee, Mr. Bush listed some of his criteria for selecting a running mate.''I'm looking for someone who could be president, someone able to fill that job,'' he said, a theme he emphasized twice.''I'm looking for someone who would be loyal,'' he added. ''I'm looking for someone who brings honesty and integrity to the office, someone whose judgment I could count upon.''Mr. Bush repeated his position that the Republican platform's plank against abortion should remain intact. General Powell, asked whether he agreed, said: ''I would work to remove it. But good friends can disagree on issues, so I don't see that there is a big fight over that.''Mr. Bush, who has been positioning himself close to the political center, faces a major decision on whether he can afford to select a running mate, like Gov. Tom Ridge of Pennsylvania, who backs abortion rights.  In a New York Times/CBS News survey this month, 3 of every 10 Republican voters polled said they would be less likely to support Mr. Bush if he picked a running mate who backed a right to abortion.As reporters tried and failed several times to draw Mr. Bush out on how much he was weighing abortion in his choice of a running mate, he seemed to grow impatient.''I'm making an exhaustive search,'' he said. ''I've laid out the characteristics necessary for the vice presidency. And at some point in time you're going to find out who it is. And on that cheery note we will end.''But Mr. Bush did say, in an interview with The Associated Press, that he was not considering either General Powell or Senator John McCain, taking them at their word that they did not want the job.THE 2000 CAMPAIGN: THE TEXAS GOVERNOR
The last time Reform Party leaders met, three months ago in Nashville, tensions rose to such an extreme that two women wrestled over control of a microphone, and the police were summoned to prevent the rowdiness from growing worse.Now party leaders are fighting over much more than a microphone.The last time Reform Party leaders met, three months ago in Nashville, tensions rose to such an extreme that two women wrestled over control of a microphone, and the police were summoned to prevent the rowdiness from growing worse.Now party leaders are fighting over much more than a microphone.The growing likelihood that Patrick J. Buchanan, the conservative television commentator and former Republican, will secure the Reform Party's presidential nomination and the $12.5 million in federal campaign money that goes along with it has created another element of conflict within the loosely organized and often chaotic party.Some Reform leaders are so worried that Mr. Buchanan and his delegates will take over the party and force it to adopt a conservative platform on abortion and other issues that they are collecting signatures to draft the party's founder, Ross Perot, for a third consecutive campaign.Another group opposed to Mr. Buchanan, led by the party's national secretary, is quietly negotiating to have the Green Party candidate, Ralph Nader, run for the Reform nomination.Still other party members are urging the leadership to endorse no presidential candidate this year, rather than Mr. Buchanan, and to turn efforts to building the party from the ground up by fielding candidates in state, city and local races. Moreover, Reform leaders in at least two states, Colorado and Georgia, have condemned Mr. Buchanan for some of his views and tactics and have demanded that he resign from the party.Georgia's rebuke came after an effort by Buchanan supporters to create a parallel Reform Party that would emphasize the candidate's strongly conservative views. Anne Merkl, the Georgia Reform Party chairwoman, said the Buchanan campaign had made similar attempts in seven other states.''By doing that,'' Ms. Merkl said, ''the Reform Party will be destroyed as we once knew it.''While it seems doubtful that the dissidents can prevent Mr. Buchanan's nomination, the discord could complicate the nominating process, making it less likely that the party's convention in Long Beach, Calif., in August will end on a note of unity.''We're unconventional, to say the least,'' said Gerald R. Moan, a Tucson businessman and former Long Islander who became party chairman just three weeks ago.Mr. Moan replaced Pat Choate, Mr. Perot's 1996 running mate and a close friend of Mr. Buchanan. Mr. Choate had won the job at the chaotic party meeting in Nashville but resigned because of an illness in his family.For such a swirl of activity against him, Mr. Buchanan does not seem especially concerned.''He'd prefer that things not be this way,'' said Bay Buchanan, his sister and chief strategist as campaign manager. ''But we're staying focused on what we're doing, trying to stay out of the fray. It's really no different than any other party. People are very unhappy when they don't get their candidate in the race.''Mr. Buchanan's ascendancy in the Reform Party has largely come through the graces of Mr. Perot, who has always encouraged disaffected Republicans and Democrats to join the cause. In recent years, few Republicans grew as disaffected as Mr. Buchanan, and by last year, as Mr. Perot withdrew from public view, he made it clear that Mr. Buchanan would be welcome in the party. But the two have not talked in two years, Ms. Buchanan said, although Russell  J. Verney, a former party chairman who remains close to Mr. Perot, said it had been closer to five years.In either case, for Mr. Buchanan, who spent years clashing with the Republican Party leadership, it was the opening he needed, both for an unobstructed path to the presidential general election and for the mantle as leader of a political party. And by  winning 5 percent of the vote Mr. Buchanan would ensure the party federal campaign money for 2004.After Gov. Jesse Ventura of Minnesota resigned from the party in February and Donald J. Trump, the New York real estate developer, dropped out of the Reform presidential race -- each angrily citing Mr. Buchanan's influence -- a vacuum was left in party leadership.Trying to fill it, Mr. Buchanan has wooed delegates, placed supporters in Reform state leadership positions and offered his America-first, socially conservative views as a credible  alternative to the major party candidates, Gov. George W. Bush of Texas and Vice President Al Gore.To win the Reform nomination, a candidate needs a majority of the votes of members who have either requested a ballot from the party,  registered as a party member in a state where the party is recognized or signed a petition supporting a party candidate in a state that has not recognized the party. Ballots can be cast in person, by mail, phone or by the Internet from July 4 to the start of the convention. But if two-thirds of the convention delegates disagree with the popular choice, they can vote to overturn the selection and pick another candidate.For now, Mr. Buchanan appears unstoppable. With no viable challengers, he is well on his way to securing the delegate support he needs to assure the Reform Party nomination, and, as the rules permit, to allow him as the nominee to rewrite the party platform to include his positions on social issues -- a possibility, Ms. Buchanan said.In addition, Mr. Buchanan has gathered enough signatures to get the Reform Party on the ballot in at least five states beyond the 20 that will automatically recognize the party based on Mr. Perot's showing in the 1996 presidential election. The Buchanan campaign expects to collect enough signatures to get the party or the candidate on the ballot in all 50 states by the final state filing deadline, Sept. 5 in Wisconsin.So much momentum by a single campaign might appear to unite a party starved for respect and credibility. But as Mr. Buchanan forges ahead, so do his opponents.''Plenty of the old-timers are still here, and they are very concerned about Pat Buchanan,'' said Ira Goodman, the New Jersey start party  chairman who is leading the effort to draft Mr. Perot. ''Our goal is to go into the primary with an alternative.''Mr. Goodman insisted that support among party members for Mr. Perot is widespread. But drawing him back into a potentially loud and contentious primary fight would seem a rather daunting challenge for now. Mr. Perot has withdrawn from the political arena.''He has not even asked to speak at the convention,'' said Mr. Moan, the party chairman, who takes that to mean Mr. Perot will not attend. ''If he comes, he'll speak. But if he doesn't come, that could be interpreted as a rebuke to Buchanan.''Mr. Verney said he did not know what Mr. Perot would do, an assertion that appears to leave open the possibility Mr. Perot might indeed be a candidate.''I can't rule it out,'' Mr. Verney said, which was the same response he offered six months ago. Only now, time is a factor; to qualify as a presidential candidate under the party's rules, Mr. Perot would have to notify the leadership by July 1 that he intends to run.''He's not launched a full-fledged campaign to be the next president,'' Mr. Verney said of Mr. Perot, who has not granted an interview in some time. ''But he hasn't ruled it out. If the members feel he would be the best person to represent the principles, ideals and goals, well, it has to happen by July 1.''Mr. Verney, who often represents Mr. Perot's views, was equally unsure whether Mr. Buchanan's ultimate goal was to run for president or rebuild the Reform Party.''It's a strange strategy,'' Mr. Verney said of Mr. Buchanan's recent aggressiveness. ''I don't understand throwing sharp elbows at would-be friends. It makes you wonder whether his goal is to be elected president on Nov. 7 or own a party on Nov. 8.''''We're doing both,'' Ms. Buchanan said. ''Pat wants to be president and he wants to build the party.''While Mr. Goodman has been collecting signatures of support for Mr. Perot, Jim Mangia, the Reform Party's national secretary, has been talking to Green Party leaders about Mr. Nader's interest in running as the Reform candidate. Despite Mr. Nader's leftward leanings, his politics are not so different from the Reform platform on issues like campaign finance reform and permanent trading status for China.But only 36 states allow a candidate to run with the support of more than one party.Donna Donovan, the party press secretary, said some members, ''as a last-ditch option,'' believe the party should sit out the presidential campaign this year and build for the future instead.While that is highly unlikely, Ms. Buchanan's view was that party members should not worry.''We're at the embryonic stage as a party,'' she said. ''Pat is bringing in new blood and a new image to the party, I'm sure, and we want to have a strong third party. So if it gets a conservative tint this time, someone else wins four years later, and then it'll have a different tint.''THE 2000 CAMPAIGN: THE REFORM PARTY
THE HOUSEA FEUD LINGERS -- It's no secret in Utah that Representative Christopher B. Cannon of the Third Congressional District and Representative Merrill Cook of the Second, both Republicans, are not the best of friends. Mr. Cook watched incredulously a few weeks ago as Mr. Cannon nominated a Cook challenger at the state Republican convention. So is Mr. Cook plotting his revenge? Who should show up at Mr. Cook's front door the other Sunday but Donald Dunn, a Democrat who is challenging Mr. Cannon. The Hill, a weekly newspaper that covers Congress, said Mr. Dunn stopped in for lunch and the two, acquaintances for years, talked about Mr. Cannon. Mr. Cook says that they chatted only a few minutes. And if it was Mr. Dunn's intention to fuel Republican discord, it would not work, Mr. Cook insists. ''It's irritating that Chris is the one member of the delegation who doesn't support me for re-election,'' Mr. Cook told The Hill. ''But that doesn't mean that I don't support the Republicans trying to retain control of the Congress.''Michael Janofsky (NYT)CONSTITUTION PARTYTHE HOUSEA FEUD LINGERS -- It's no secret in Utah that Representative Christopher B. Cannon of the Third Congressional District and Representative Merrill Cook of the Second, both Republicans, are not the best of friends. Mr. Cook watched incredulously a few weeks ago as Mr. Cannon nominated a Cook challenger at the state Republican convention. So is Mr. Cook plotting his revenge? Who should show up at Mr. Cook's front door the other Sunday but Donald Dunn, a Democrat who is challenging Mr. Cannon. The Hill, a weekly newspaper that covers Congress, said Mr. Dunn stopped in for lunch and the two, acquaintances for years, talked about Mr. Cannon. Mr. Cook says that they chatted only a few minutes. And if it was Mr. Dunn's intention to fuel Republican discord, it would not work, Mr. Cook insists. ''It's irritating that Chris is the one member of the delegation who doesn't support me for re-election,'' Mr. Cook told The Hill. ''But that doesn't mean that I don't support the Republicans trying to retain control of the Congress.''Michael Janofsky (NYT)CONSTITUTION PARTYNEWS FROM ANOTHER CAMP -- The Reform Party and the even lesser known Green Party are getting some national coverage this year, thanks to Patrick J. Buchanan and Ralph Nader, the front-runners for their respective presidential nominations. And recently the staunchly conservative Constitution Party, which is hardly ever covered, has been in the news, too, thanks to the conservative commentator Alan Keyes, a Republican White House hopeful. He warned the other day that he would jump to the Constitution Party should the Republican Party weaken its anti-abortion stand. Then Howard Phillips, the party's presidential nominee, announced at a press luncheon that his party had quietly completed ballot access work in 30 states, no small political achievement if all 30 are eventually certified. Together, he said, those states are worth 290 electoral votes, 20 more than required to win. But he is not running to win, he insisted, only to increase his party's visibility, expand its base and advance its ''true conservative philosophy.''Irvin Molotsky (NYT)THE STATESINDIANS AND POLITICS -- California is the state where the most money is spent on political campaigns. And in recent years, California's Indian tribes have become the biggest-spending interest group in the state, pouring about $114 million into campaigns since 1998. Why, given that Indians account for less than 15 percent of California's population? Statistics compiled by the California chapter of Common Cause show that most of the money was spent on a successful one-time effort to pass ballot measures permitting expansion of reservation gambling, a move that is expected to eventually make California second only to Nevada as a casino mecca. But the figures pulled together by Common Cause, a private watchdog organization, also show that the tribes are giving heavily to elect candidates, dwarfing contributions by all other groups in recent years by handing out $7 million. The second-biggest-spending interest group in the state, Common Cause said, is the state prison guard union, the California Correctional Peace Officers Association. Representing security personnel in the country's largest prison system, it gave $1.9 million to candidates over the last two years.(NYT)THE REPUBLICANSBUSH DAUGHTERS' DAY -- ''I'll have a tear in my eye,'' Gov. George W. Bush said yesterday in Austin, Tex., as he prepared to watch his twin daughters, Jenna and Barbara, graduate from Stephen F. Austin High School and head off for college. ''They mean more to us than anything in life,'' he went on. ''Today is a big day.'' Then, making clear that he wanted to continue the family's  effort to shield the teenagers as much as possible from the spotlight of public life, he told reporters, ''You all aren't invited, by the way.''Alison Mitchell (NYT)THE 2000 CAMPAIGN
Gov. George W. Bush's proposal this week to consider unilateral reductions in the American nuclear arsenal was a break with decades of strategic doctrine, a break that may foretell the end of traditional theories of arms control.In Mr. Bush's vision, still lacking in many details, the threat of global annihilation -- or ''mutual assured destruction'' -- would no longer govern relations between the United States and other powers. The size of the American nuclear arsenal would no longer depend on the number of warheads that Russia possesses, nor be set in lengthy and painstaking arms control negotiations.Gov. George W. Bush's proposal this week to consider unilateral reductions in the American nuclear arsenal was a break with decades of strategic doctrine, a break that may foretell the end of traditional theories of arms control.In Mr. Bush's vision, still lacking in many details, the threat of global annihilation -- or ''mutual assured destruction'' -- would no longer govern relations between the United States and other powers. The size of the American nuclear arsenal would no longer depend on the number of warheads that Russia possesses, nor be set in lengthy and painstaking arms control negotiations.And the defensive shield against nuclear weapons that he proposes to build -- significantly larger than that envisioned by the Clinton administration -- would be shared with American allies and, perhaps one day, with Russia or even China.Many of these ideas have been percolating among a bipartisan body of experts in the arms control community for years.Indeed, it was President Ronald Reagan who trumpeted the idea of slashing offensive nuclear weapons and relying instead on a defensive shield that would render nuclear missiles obsolete. And at Reykjavik, Iceland, in 1986, Mr. Reagan also agreed with Mikhail Gorbachev, the Soviet leader, on the principle of eliminating all their nuclear weapons, before he was pulled back by his advisers.Years later, arms control is suddenly back at center stage in a presidential campaign that was expected to focus on domestic policy. And some of those same advisers who pushed Mr. Reagan away from his radical views on arms control are now advising Governor Bush, the presumptive Republican nominee, as he gives new voice to the idea of large cuts in offensive weapons, coupled with construction of missile defenses, and places it squarely on the current political agenda.President Clinton will push his own arms control agenda in Moscow in 10 days when he meets with President Vladimir Putin to discuss cuts in long-range warheads. For new cuts, the administration wants Moscow to accept changes in a 1972 treaty to allow the fielding of a limited missile defense system.Mr. Bush and his advisers argue that it is long past time for a radical reassessment of nuclear armaments. The idea of holding populations hostage to annihilation is worse than immoral, they say; it is irrelevant. They complain that President Clinton has wasted much of the decade since the end of the cold war by clinging to the orthodoxy of using the specter of ''mutual assured destruction'' to deter any nuclear power from contemplating a first strike.''It's way past time for some fresh thinking about the structure of military capability in light of the kind of world we now live in,'' said George P. Shultz, secretary of state in the Reagan administration and one of Mr. Bush's foreign policy advisers. ''That really hasn't been done.''Mr. Shultz, who was well known as a skeptic about Mr. Reagan's vision of a space-based umbrella to shield the United States from nuclear warheads, said his thinking has evolved on such defenses because of the rapid advance of technology. He said Mr. Bush knows that current technology cannot produce an impermeable nuclear shield any time soon. But, he added, ''it's not too much to say there is a reasonable prospect to interpose a thin layer of defense.''Barry Blechman, a nuclear analyst at the Henry L. Stimson Center in Washington, called this sort of talk ''a breakthrough in Republican thinking.''''Bush is talking about going down to numbers that are lower than the military is currently willing to go,'' Mr. Blechman said.What's more, Mr. Bush is discussing the possibility of making such reductions unilaterally, rather than through years of negotiations with Russia or China over accuracy, throw-weights, basing modes, build-downs and other esoterica.Mr. Bush said he envisions a sweeping review of strategic needs by the Pentagon that will help establish the optimal size of the nuclear force. He will then challenge Russia to match American reductions in weaponry. His chief foreign policy adviser, Condoleezza Rice, calls these ''reciprocal unilateral measures'' and describes them as a simpler and less time-consuming way to do arms control than the interminable talks that have dominated arms control efforts with Moscow.As another Bush adviser put it: ''The governor said he was going to figure out what we need, reduce to that level, and encourage the Russians to do the same. We're not going to build stuff we don't need just because Russians have stuff they don't need.''But that was precisely the calculation that governed the arms race in the second half of the 20th century: each superpower kept building up its stockpile to match the other's, far beyond the needs of deterrence or any possible military requirement.Vice President Al Gore had hoped that such questions would not become central to the presidential campaign this year. He and other administration officials felt they had neutralized much of the Republican fervor for a robust missile shield by moving toward a decision this year on a limited system of land-based national missile defense.But Governor Bush portrayed the administration's approach as timid. He proposed a broader missile shield to appeal to conservatives and deeper weapons cuts than the administration has been willing to entertain.Since the days of the missile gap, four things have changed the nuclear equation in fundamental ways: The Soviet Union fell apart. Advances in technology have held out the promise of missile defenses that may be at least partly effective. Years of arms control agreements have reduced the numbers of nuclear weapons by thousands with no apparent impact on the relative security of the United States and Russia. And a handful of smaller nations, among them North Korea and Iraq, have made strides toward developing nuclear weapons.Mr. Bush and his advisers argued this week that United States policy has not kept pace with any of these developments.''While deterrence remains the first line of defense against nuclear attack, the standoff of the cold war was born of a different time,'' Mr. Bush said in a speech Tuesday at the National Press Club. ''Yet almost a decade after the end of the cold war, our nuclear policy still resides in that already distant past.''He proposed measures that would alter that policy, including building a defensive system that would cover all 50 states and could be extended to protect allies in Europe, the Middle East and Asia. In addition to holding out the possibility of large unilateral arms cuts, he said most American nuclear weapons should be removed from hair-trigger alert status.He also offered reassurance to Moscow and Beijing that the American system, though it would almost surely entail violating the Antiballistic Missile Treaty of 1972, was not aimed at neutralizing their arsenals of long-range weapons.That is an argument that has so far been rejected by those two countries, especially by China, whose relatively small nuclear force could be rendered irrelevant by even the limited antimissile system favored by Mr. Clinton.Both countries argue that the old system of deterrence that Mr. Bush derides as outdated is still the most reliable method of keeping the nuclear peace. Chinese officials have said they might have to accelerate their own nuclear program if the Americans build an antimissile shield.Mr. Gore quickly issued a statement rejecting Mr. Bush's ideas as risky and irresponsible. He said Mr. Bush wanted to resurrect the discredited Star Wars program of the Reagan era and flaunt American military superiority over Russia, China and every other nation. And he chastised Governor Bush for opposing the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty, which was defeated in the Senate last fall on a largely party-line vote.Mr. Gore's response drew a rebuke from Mr. Bush's advisers.Brent Scowcroft, the national security adviser to President George Bush and a retired Air Force general, said construction of missile defenses should not be seen as a threat to the nuclear forces of Russia and China nor as an incentive for them to beef up their arsenals.Moscow has sufficient political and financial reasons to continue to draw down its nuclear stockpile, he said, while Beijing is likely to  continue its nuclear buildup regardless of what the United States does because it faces growing threats in its own region.''This goes back to the cooperative concept,'' he said. ''We tell both of them, 'North Korea is a problem for us; it's a problem for you, too. How can you help us, by changing the threat or helping us deal with it?' ''In a statement today, Senator Joseph R. Biden Jr., the senior Democrat on the Foreign Relations Committee, praised Mr. Bush's ideas -- up to a point. He applauded his intention to undertake a thorough review of America's nuclear posture and endorsed his plan to take weapons off high-alert status. He agreed that the size of the nuclear arsenal could safely be reduced.But Mr. Biden also said that Mr. Bush held an unrealistic view of the feasibility and cost of missile defenses and that a radical revision of decades of deterrence unnerve allies and adversaries alike.The senator urged Mr. Bush and Mr. Gore to remove the question from the political debate and to allow the next president to study the matter outside of the electoral arena.''The longest-lasting foreign policy debate is not likely to be settled any time soon,'' Mr. Biden said.
When Representative Tom DeLay came to work on Wednesday, he was still a vote or two shy of the bare-minimum 150 Republicans he needed to help push the China trade bill over the top.Mr. DeLay, the Republican whip, had lined up lots of help. Gov. George W. Bush of Texas was recruited to cajole several wavering Republicans. So was Gen. Colin L. Powell. Dozens of pro-trade lobbyists and corporate chieftains fanned out on Capitol Hill to buttonhole the last dozen or so undeclared members for what both camps predicted would be a nail-biter.When Representative Tom DeLay came to work on Wednesday, he was still a vote or two shy of the bare-minimum 150 Republicans he needed to help push the China trade bill over the top.Mr. DeLay, the Republican whip, had lined up lots of help. Gov. George W. Bush of Texas was recruited to cajole several wavering Republicans. So was Gen. Colin L. Powell. Dozens of pro-trade lobbyists and corporate chieftains fanned out on Capitol Hill to buttonhole the last dozen or so undeclared members for what both camps predicted would be a nail-biter.Over the next crucial hours, those calls and an array of other influences paid off, as virtually every undeclared Republican, and even a few others who had been written off, broke Mr. DeLay's way. In all, 164 Republicans joined 73 Democrats voted to grant China permanent normal trading status, wiping out economic restrictions rooted in cold-war policy for a quarter century.''Frankly, they surprised me a little bit,'' said Mr. DeLay, whose bare-knuckle approach to head-counting has earned him the nickname the Hammer. ''Members in the last few hours really turned around and understood how important this was,'' he added.The bill now goes to the Senate, where critics are already preparing amendments that could upset the delicately crafted measure.Normalizing trade with China was a victory for the Clinton administration, but House Republicans had their own reasons for voting three-to-one in favor of the bill. Passage insured that Republicans' corporate benefactors would fully benefit from a market-opening accord Washington and Beijing negotiated that slashes Chinese tariffs on a wide range of farm and industrial products and removes some barriers to American service providers, like banks and telecommunications companies.The House Republican leadership closed ranks behind the bill, arguing passionately that economic engagement would foster political change. But they needed to produce two-thirds of the yes votes, and had a tough sell with many Republicans who balked at rewarding a trade plum to a Communist government with a record of religious persecution and political repression.''There was nothing simple about this,'' said Bob Schaffer of Colorado, one of the last conservative House Republicans to climb down off the fence in favor.  ''The 51 percent of this bill that's good only barely outweighs the 49 percent that is truly deplorable.''Republican leaders said a number of factors helped sway undeclared members in the final  days and hours to provide the unexpectedly large margin of victory. An amendment creating a commission to monitor human rights in China won half a dozen Republicans and many more Democrats.Republicans lined up Chinese dissidents who said that the bill would improve the rights of religious minorities, arguing that persecution cannot survive the advent of the Internet. Representative David Dreier of California, a chief Republican supporter, enlisted the evangelist Billy Graham to endorse the measure.Two dozen Republicans with national security concerns were steered to General Powell or Representative Porter Goss, a Florida Republican who heads the House Intelligence Committee. ''I told them, the more open a society the better opportunity we have of getting results,'' said Mr. Goss.Many members cited increased trade and national security benefits as reasons to vote yes. These broader merits, combined with the home-district considerations, collectively sealed the decisions of many borderline supporters.''The key factor for me was that this was the last best hope to save family farms in middle and eastern Tennessee,'' said Representative Van Hilleary of Tennessee, who said Europe's agreement with China last week on Beijing's entry into the World Trade Organization also  convinced him that American jobs were at stake.Finally, a few members who were leaning toward voting yes needed a touch of outside help to reach their decision. Governor Bush, the presumptive Republican presidential nominee, spoke to a handful of Republicans, including Ernie Fletcher of Kentucky, who was impressed by Mr. Bush's commitment to improving human rights in China.Christopher Cox, a California Republican and outspoken critic of China, endorsed the measure after provisions in the human rights commission were strengthened. Elton Gallegly, a California Republican, said backing the bill was easier after he spoke to Agriculture Secretary Dan Glickman about keeping a ban an Argentine oranges, which could introduce a citrus-killing insect into southern California orchards.Representative Spencer Bachus, an Alabama Republican with steel mills in his district, voted in favor after Republican leaders agreed to amend a spending bill to address his concerns about imported coke, which is used in steel-processing. ''We're always sensitive to our members needs,'' said Susan B. Hirschmann, Mr. DeLay's chief of staff.By the roll call, all but a handful of the 15 or so Republicans who started the day on the leaders' lists as undecided voted yes.''I've been counting votes for a long, long time and never in my life have I seen that many undecideds break in favor of a position,'' said Nick Calio, a bill supporter who was President Bush's top lobbyist on Capitol Hill.Labor leaders said they had been outgunned. ''The business community unleashed an unprecedented campaign that was hard for anyone to match,'' said George Becker, president of the United Steel Workers of America.The China bill's 40-vote margin of victory in the House, 237 to 197, would seem to give it unstoppable momentum as the legislation now moves to the Senate for consideration, probably next month. Passage in the Senate, which is usually considered more pro-trade and internationalist, had appeared more certain.But lurking in the Senate are critics like Jesse Helms, the North Carolina Republican who heads the Foreign Relations Committee. Mr. Helms, a fierce foe of the Beijing government, said after the House vote that he would not allow the Senate ''to simply rubber-stamp the President's plan to reward the Chinese Communists.''Opponents do not have the votes in the Senate to kill the House bill, but amending it -- open to any Senator -- would force House and Senate negotiators to hammer out a compromise of the competing chambers' bills.  The House would then have to cast a second vote on the revised bill.Supporters vowed today to push for speedy Senate passage of a clean House bill.''There will be efforts to derail this by using amendments and other parliamentary means,'' said Senator Chuck Hagel, a Nebraska Republican who supports the measure. ''But we have to keep this moving.''Rushing to the next legislative battleground, Commerce Secretary William Daley, Mr. Clinton's point man on the China bill, marched to the Capitol today to meet with the Senate majority leader, Trent Lott, and senior members of the Finance Committee, which has jurisdiction over the bill.Mr. Lott gave no hint of when the Senate will take up the measure, Mr. Daley said in an interview, and when asked how serious Mr. Helms's veiled threats were, the secretary said, ''It's hard to judge how serious anything Chairman Helms does.''Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan of New York, the senior Democrat on the Finance Committee, said he and panel's chairman, William V. Roth Jr., Republican of Delaware, had no problems with the House bill. ''Our job now is to see that the bill stays right on the floor and is passed as it was sent to us,'' said Mr. Moynihan.
To the Editor:Wayne LaPierre, the executive vice president of the National Rifle Association, discounted the Million Mom March when he said, ''It wasn't a grass-roots rally but a Gore campaign rally, scripted and coached by the White House'' (news article, May 21).As a 68-year-old grandmother who made the difficult trek from New York to Washington and back on May 14 to take part in the march, I am disturbed at that characterization of our efforts. None of the people I went with on the bus -- a group from Nyack, N.Y. -- had any political agenda whatsoever.To the Editor:Wayne LaPierre, the executive vice president of the National Rifle Association, discounted the Million Mom March when he said, ''It wasn't a grass-roots rally but a Gore campaign rally, scripted and coached by the White House'' (news article, May 21).As a 68-year-old grandmother who made the difficult trek from New York to Washington and back on May 14 to take part in the march, I am disturbed at that characterization of our efforts. None of the people I went with on the bus -- a group from Nyack, N.Y. -- had any political agenda whatsoever.We were a grass-roots group of mothers, grandmothers, children and a few fathers, who were unaffiliated in this instance with any political party or organization. We were motivated by the single issue of gun registration and licensing to protect our children.JOAN  WILE  New York, May 22, 2000
An article yesterday about Vice President Al Gore's position on Social Security misstated one element of his personal finances. Mr. Gore receives no income from investments in the stock market. Although his financial disclosure form lists dividend income, the stock is held in trust for his mother, and the income goes only to her.An article yesterday about Vice President Al Gore's position on Social Security misstated one element of his personal finances. Mr. Gore receives no income from investments in the stock market. Although his financial disclosure form lists dividend income, the stock is held in trust for his mother, and the income goes only to her.
There was surprisingly little shock when the General Accounting Office revealed this week that investigators with forged badges were able to gain entry into what are supposedly some of the most secure of federal agencies. It was, after all, only the latest in a series of similarly alarming stories about security lapses in the federal government.The holders of the phony badges were intentionally testing security at doorways of the Justice Department, Pentagon, C.I.A., F.B.I. and State Department. Earlier reports described security lapses including the bugging of a conference room and the theft of a laptop computer, loaded with highly classified information, at the State Department; allegations of misuse of nuclear weapons information at Los Alamos; and concerns about government officials flouting security regulations.There was surprisingly little shock when the General Accounting Office revealed this week that investigators with forged badges were able to gain entry into what are supposedly some of the most secure of federal agencies. It was, after all, only the latest in a series of similarly alarming stories about security lapses in the federal government.The holders of the phony badges were intentionally testing security at doorways of the Justice Department, Pentagon, C.I.A., F.B.I. and State Department. Earlier reports described security lapses including the bugging of a conference room and the theft of a laptop computer, loaded with highly classified information, at the State Department; allegations of misuse of nuclear weapons information at Los Alamos; and concerns about government officials flouting security regulations.What is going on? Did security discipline inside the United States government collapse along with the Soviet Union? Has technology, including the proliferation of computers, Internet access and e-mail, made security significantly harder to enforce? Is there a lack of concern about security among senior officials and a concomitant inadequacy of priority and resources?The answer to all of these questions would appear to be yes.Of course, security problems are nothing new. Espionage from abroad and violations of security rules at home were facts of life during the cold war and were found at virtually every department and agency possessing sensitive information. All too often, misuse of such information was attributable to senior officials.The technical problems in providing security are plainly more difficult than they were a decade or two ago. The material on a single floppy disk, carried out of a government building in a pocket, once would have required a wheelbarrow to purloin.  The Internet creates an opportunity to send secrets anywhere in the world without risky dead drops and brush passes. And there is the temptation to bypass the rules by transferring secret information to one's own computer for reasons as mundane as personal convenience.Still, new technological advances are naturally answered by new rules and monitoring techniques. As before, good security is primarily a matter of compliance with rules and procedures that already exist.A deeper change is atmospheric. In World War II and, to a somewhat lesser extent, during the cold war, there was a very real sense on the part of those with access to sensitive information that security really mattered because of the stakes involved in those struggles. This didn't stop a small number of Americans from spying for others and a much larger number from leaking secrets. Overall, though, there was more discipline, and more people cared, because we were in life and death conflicts and few wanted to give our adversaries any advantage.Apparently, the risks seem smaller now to many -- including not only people directly charged with protecting secrets, but those who control their budgets. As defense, intelligence and diplomatic budgets have shrunk, resources for security -- physical safety as well as protection of information -- often have been early victims of the budget axes.Perhaps most important, tone and attitude at the top are vital. From the outset of the current administration, whether by allowing people to work at the White House before security clearances were approved by the F.B.I. or showing indifference to and even disdain for security as a manifestation of a ''cold war mindset,'' a message has been sent that these issues are no longer very important.  Individual senior officials in various departments and agencies have reinforced that message, partly with arrogant attitudes conveying the idea that the rules do not apply to them.Good security still starts and ends with trust, integrity and seriousness of purpose. Agencies need more resources. But simply observing the rules that already exist, from the top down, would go a long way.  Robert M. Gates served on the National Security Council staff under four presidents and was director of the Central Intelligence Agency under President George Bush.
The most important foreign policy vote so far this year, the 237-to-197 House approval of the China trade deal, was no new affirmation of internationalism by an often provincial Congress, but a reaffirmation of one of its oldest truths: Members vote their districts.That is, they vote their districts if their constituents have an interest, and a trade bill is a singular foreign policy measure because the question of jobs gained and lost commands attention from lawmakers and constituents ordinarily not much concerned about the rest of the world.The most important foreign policy vote so far this year, the 237-to-197 House approval of the China trade deal, was no new affirmation of internationalism by an often provincial Congress, but a reaffirmation of one of its oldest truths: Members vote their districts.That is, they vote their districts if their constituents have an interest, and a trade bill is a singular foreign policy measure because the question of jobs gained and lost commands attention from lawmakers and constituents ordinarily not much concerned about the rest of the world.But other foreign policy matters have far smaller constituencies, and are much more subject to Washington's political influences, especially partisanship. To put it meanly, each party plays politics with foreign policy; to put it kindly, each trusts presidents of its own party but discerns grave weaknesses on the other side.In any case, the ''internationalist'' Republicans who supported President Bush's Persian Gulf war in 1991 suddenly became ''isolationist'' Republicans who opposed President Clinton over military action in Somalia (where Mr. Bush actually had sent the troops), as well as in Bosnia and Kosovo. The Democrats, meanwhile, eagerly seized the labels the Republicans had dropped.There are some members of Congress who take the ''internationalist'' view on trade, intervention abroad, United Nations financing and comparable issues regardless of party, at least most of the time.But looking at a dozen key votes dating back to the gulf war, there are only 10 current House members who voted that way all the time. Several are Southern Democrats with no union pressure over trade to worry about. Two are Democrats from Washington State, where union desires to sell Boeing airplanes to China overcome all other trade questions. And one is a moderate Republican, Representative Constance A. Morella from the suburbs of Washington, D.C.But most representatives rise or fall on domestic records, and for them ''foreign policy is totally unimportant most of the time,'' said Barbara Bardes, a political scientist at the University of Cincinnati. ''They are available for those swing votes as long as it doesn't hurt them.''And more of them are available these days because two factors encouraging instinctive support of a president no longer matter.One was the cold war, which drew the argument that the United States would seem weak to the Soviet Union if the president could not enforce his foreign policy views, even in areas of no concern to Moscow.A second is the departure of the World War II generation from Congress. Only nine veterans of that war now serve in the House. The Senate has lost the voice of Bob Dole, who could tell his colleagues that once the president had made a decision, even a weak one, he must be supported.The ''sort of 'president knows best' attitude is gone,'' said another student of Congressional behavior on foreign policy, James McCormack, an Iowa State University political scientist.Indeed, that generation has been replaced by the skeptical veterans and nonveterans of the Vietnam era, for whom ''the commander-in-chief thing doesn't work,'' Dr. Bardes said. ''They are worried about becoming too involved.''That attitude produces resolutions demanding withdrawal of troops from Bosnia and Kosovo, delays in appropriations for drug wars in Colombia and, at its most intense level, Senate rejection of the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty.The consequence is that, ''given the polarization of the parties, almost any major initiative requires a major effort'' by the president, said Bob Pastor, a political scientist at Emory University in Atlanta.This China trade bill got that intense effort, not just from the administration, but from business and House Republicans, too.But without outside allies of the weight of the business interests that backed this bill, the administration lost the nuclear test treaty and faces continual difficulties in getting the money to pay back dues to the United Nations.That effort was required because even if this was fundamentally a trade bill, where most of the votes depended on jobs gained for Florida fertilizer mills or lost to textile plants in North Carolina, it also carried the baggage of a foreign policy measure about a Chinese government that no one in Congress will defend. This was not a pure trade measure, like the question of extending lower tariffs to Chile.The 57 Republicans who voted no were primarily motivated by China's treatment of Christians and political dissidents, plus its reported espionage activity against the United States. And others were tempted, doubting the argument that trade would broaden Chinese society.Representative Tom Tancredo of Colorado dripped with sarcasm: ''We have been told wonderful things will flow from expanded trade with China. Workers' rights will be respected, religious freedom will be enhanced, and probably Jeffersonian study groups will be popping up all over China.''But supporters like Representative Nancy L. Johnson, Republican of Connecticut, disagreed. She quoted a clergyman, Rev. Daniel Baida Su, who told the Ways and Means Committee that the deal and membership in the World Trade Organization obliged ''China to play by the rules.''''In the process, China will need to strengthen its legal institutions, train more legal professionals, learn to follow international legal procedures, and educate its people about the concept of rights, law and international norms,'' Ms. Johnson quoted Mr. Su as saying. ''This process alone is a breakthrough with important philosophical implications for China as a nation. When a Chinese realizes he has rights as an investor that government should not violate, then more likely he will also realize that he has other rights as a human being.''But her argument would not have prevailed without the sense in Congress that more jobs were to be gained than lost, and without the labor opposition suffering from the label of ''protectionism,'' concerned about saving the jobs of union members at the expense of the American economy in general.John J. Sweeney, president of the A.F.L.-C.I.O., called that label ''very unfair.'' He said in an interview: ''We realize the value of trade with any country. We recognize the expansion of globalization. But in this new global economy, we must strive for rules that protect human rights and workers rights and the environment and not just profits.''It was the bill itself that was protectionist, he said, as an ''outright attempt to protect profits without any concern for human rights and workers' rights.''That argument was often heard on the House floor. Representative Janice D. Schakowsky, an Illinois Democrat, said the bill encouraged United States companies to take ''advantage of the nearest slave labor conditions and wages.'' That sort of attack went largely unchallenged.But arguments like those of Representative Marge Roukema prevailed. The New Jersey Republican saw huge opportunities for American energy, gas, construction, telecommunications and engineering companies in China. ''Not only for New Jersey,'' she said, ''but for the nation, the bottom line here is that this is a jobs bill.''
Speaking to a Roman Catholic group, Gov. George W. Bush today took the side of the Vatican in a battle over its status at the United Nations, a clash that stems in large part from its stands in international disputes over family planning and abortion.Mr. Bush, criticized during the Republican primary campaign for appearing at Bob Jones University, whose leaders have expressed anti-Catholic views, brought up the effort by a number of groups, many of them women's and health organizations that disagree with the church on abortion and family planning, to downgrade the Vatican's permanent-observer status.Speaking to a Roman Catholic group, Gov. George W. Bush today took the side of the Vatican in a battle over its status at the United Nations, a clash that stems in large part from its stands in international disputes over family planning and abortion.Mr. Bush, criticized during the Republican primary campaign for appearing at Bob Jones University, whose leaders have expressed anti-Catholic views, brought up the effort by a number of groups, many of them women's and health organizations that disagree with the church on abortion and family planning, to downgrade the Vatican's permanent-observer status.''In world affairs, the Holy See has long been an influence for the good, and never more than in the last couple of decades,'' said Mr. Bush, speaking by satellite hookup to the Catholic Press Association, which was meeting in Baltimore.''Some groups have been trying to silence that voice in the United Nations,'' he said. ''The position of the current administration is unclear. The position of my administration will be very clear and firm: America supports permanent-observer status for the Holy See.''But aides to both Vice President Al Gore and Richard C. Holbrooke, the United States' chief delegate to the United Nations, said Mr. Gore and the Clinton administration backed  the Vatican's permanent-observer status as well.''Bush is once again making foolish charges,'' said Douglas Hattaway, a spokesman for Mr. Gore.In his talk to the Catholic Press Association, Mr. Bush also spoke of compassion and values, his remarks sprinkled with quotations from both Pope John Paul II and Cardinal John O'Connor, the late archbishop of New York. ''A truly welcoming society must be a culture of life,'' the governor said, calling for the ''day when every child, born and unborn, is welcome in life and protected in law.''And he drew applause when he said he supported legislation to ban a kind of late-term abortion whose opponents refer to it as ''partial birth.''In response to a question, Mr. Bush defended Texas' record on executions, saying capital punishment, more common here than in any other state, ''sends a chilling message'' that deters crime. He said once again  that he knew of no one innocent whom the state had executed.As for the controversy over the Holy See, the Vatican has had special observer status at the United Nations since the organization's birth more than half a century ago. It cannot vote in the General Assembly, but it takes part as a full member nation in international conferences, where it has taken strong stands against contraception and abortion. Groups that have called for the Vatican to lose its special status argue that it is not a state, but rather a religious headquarters.Mr. Bush's aides said his comments today about the Clinton administration's position on the matter had been prompted by the United States mission's sponsoring a news conference in March by Catholics for Free Choice, a group seeking a review of the Vatican's status. A non-government organization, or N.G.O., has to be sponsored by a member nation in order to hold a news conference at the United Nations.Mary Ellen Glynn, a spokeswoman for Mr. Holbrooke, the chief United States delegate, said the mission also granted sponsorship the next day to another Catholic organization, which took the other side of the issue.''Our policy is to sponsor legitimate N.G.O.'s if they want to use the facilities -- nothing more, nothing less,'' Ms. Glynn said. ''It is a nonpartisan policy.''She said the administration supported the Vatican's status. ''We work very well with the Holy See on a variety of issues,'' she said.An aide to Mr. Bush who briefed reporters at the governor's campaign headquarters here said a Bush administration would not have given Catholics for Free Choice access to the United Nations. But this aide  spoke on the condition that he not be identified. Ari Fleischer, spokesman for the campaign, was less definitive, saying that if a Bush administration  sponsored such a group, Mr. Bush  ''would make clear he didn't share their point of view.''Mr. Hattaway, speaking for Mr. Gore, said of Mr. Bush and his visit to Bob Jones University, ''If he's truly concerned about Catholics, why did he address a place that calls Catholicism a cult?''The controversy over Mr. Bush's campaign stop at Bob Jones, in South Carolina, was stoked by Senator John McCain, who was Mr. Bush's main rival for the Republican presidential nomination. Mr. Bush later wrote to Cardinal O'Connor to say he regretted not having used his appearance at Bob Jones to speak out against its leaders' views.
A federal appellate court refused today to interfere in a lawsuit brought by a group that accuses President Clinton of violating the Privacy Act of 1974. But the ruling was still a partial victory for the White House.The three-judge panel of the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit said there was no need to issue an emergency order sought by the White House to block pretrial information gathering, or discovery, in the suit brought by Judicial Watch, a conservative group that has been a persistent opponent of Mr. Clinton.A federal appellate court refused today to interfere in a lawsuit brought by a group that accuses President Clinton of violating the Privacy Act of 1974. But the ruling was still a partial victory for the White House.The three-judge panel of the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit said there was no need to issue an emergency order sought by the White House to block pretrial information gathering, or discovery, in the suit brought by Judicial Watch, a conservative group that has been a persistent opponent of Mr. Clinton.In response to today's ruling, a White House spokesman, Jim Kennedy, said that while White House lawyers were disappointed by the decision on discovery, they would abide by it. But he added that the lawyers were ''very pleased'' by other elements of the ruling.The appellate panel sharply criticized a lower court judge who asserted in a March 29 ruling that the president committed ''a criminal violation of the Privacy Act'' in releasing personal letters sent to him by Kathleen Willey, a former White House volunteer.In March 1998, Ms. Willey accused Mr. Clinton on the CBS News program ''60 Minutes'' of making a sexual advance toward her in the fall of 1993. Her account added to the burdens of the president during the investigation of his relationship with Monica S. Lewinsky and the sexual misconduct lawsuit filed by Paula Corbin Jones.Soon after Ms. Willey's television appearance, the president released her letters -- reluctantly, he said -- in the hope that their friendly tone would undercut her accusations. She had written them after the time she said the advance took place.Ms. Willey is not a party to the suit by Judicial Watch, which contends that the White House improperly obtained hundreds of files from the Federal Bureau of Investigation on former appointees and employees of the Reagan and Bush administrations. Judicial Watch has focused on the handling of the Willey letters in the hope of uncovering evidence that might buttress its allegations involving misuse of the bureau's files.On March 29, Judge Royce C. Lamberth of United States District Court here ruled that White House lawyers should submit to questioning by lawyers from Judicial Watch. He went further, declaring that Mr. Clinton had acted unlawfully in releasing Ms. Willey's letters, which were kept among White House records. The Privacy Act generally prohibits release of information about a person from federal records without that person's consent; violations of the law can result in fines.Today, the appellate judges -- Harry T. Edwards, Douglas H. Ginsburg and David S. Tatel -- said Judge Lamberth's ''sweeping pronouncements'' about supposed criminal activity were inappropriate and ''entirely superfluous.''The White House has contended that much of its business is exempt from the Privacy Act, and that many lawyers from both political parties have long said so. The appellate panel said today that, in matters unrelated to the Judicial Watch case, the White House could continue to operate under that assumption unless a court declared otherwise.Mr. Clinton and his allies have made no secret of their feeling that Judge Lamberth, who was appointed by President Ronald Reagan in 1987, is unfriendly to the administration.
In the 11 weeks since Vice President Al Gore beat former Senator Bill Bradley in the Democratic presidential race, the two men have not spoken. But there are signs that a reconciliation may lie ahead.Aides to Mr. Bradley say they expect him to appear with Mr. Gore sometime before the Democratic National Convention in August, and possibly as soon as next month. And in a news conference on Thursday night, Mr. Gore acknowledged as much.In the 11 weeks since Vice President Al Gore beat former Senator Bill Bradley in the Democratic presidential race, the two men have not spoken. But there are signs that a reconciliation may lie ahead.Aides to Mr. Bradley say they expect him to appear with Mr. Gore sometime before the Democratic National Convention in August, and possibly as soon as next month. And in a news conference on Thursday night, Mr. Gore acknowledged as much.Asked whether he expected to appear publicly with Mr. Bradley, Mr. Gore imitated a fortuneteller, closing his eyes, pointing a finger to his temple and saying, ''I see that in the future.'' He declined to say when the appearance would take place.And though the two men have not spoken in weeks, Mr. Gore contended that their relationship was ''in good shape.''''Our people are in regular communication,'' he said.Some have doubts that those talks can overcome the bad feelings of the primaries. Disappointed with his failure to win a single state and dismayed with Mr. Gore's brass-knuckle campaign, Mr. Bradley disappeared from public view after bowing out of the race on March 9. And Mr. Gore has made little personal effort to draw him out.But aides to the two men have been in negotiations that are expected to culminate in plans for Mr. Bradley to campaign for, and possibly with, Mr. Gore. Conducting the negotiations are Tony Coelho, Mr. Gore's campaign chairman, and Rick Wright, Mr. Bradley's close friend and former campaign treasurer. The talks have focused largely on Mr. Bradley's role at the convention and the number of supporters he will be allowed to take along as delegates.In his news conference on Thursday night, Mr. Gore said Mr. Bradley would definitely be given time to speak at the convention. Asked about negotiations over delegates, the vice president replied, ''I don't think there will be a problem of any kind.''Aides to Mr. Bradley say talks between the two camps have been reasonably smooth. But some friends of his contend that the Gore campaign should have acted sooner to unify the party and recruit his help. They say one reason Mr. Bradley has kept a low profile is that Mr. Gore has not called him personally to request his support. ''They've obviously made a calculation that they don't need Bradley's help,'' said one Democratic member of Congress who supported the Bradley campaign.
Carved by ice and washed by as much as 12 feet of rain a year, the Tongass National Forest stretches across Alaska's panhandle, full of coastal fjords and majestic strands of spruce, cedar and hemlock, which John Muir described in 1879 as a seemingly ''indefinite, on-leading expansiveness.''Indeed, at 17 million acres, the Tongass is more than three times the size of any other national forest. But as the Clinton administration promotes its far-reaching plan to safeguard the forests by banning new road building throughout much of the system, the Tongass has a curious distinction: it is the one national forest specifically exempted from such a ban.Carved by ice and washed by as much as 12 feet of rain a year, the Tongass National Forest stretches across Alaska's panhandle, full of coastal fjords and majestic strands of spruce, cedar and hemlock, which John Muir described in 1879 as a seemingly ''indefinite, on-leading expansiveness.''Indeed, at 17 million acres, the Tongass is more than three times the size of any other national forest. But as the Clinton administration promotes its far-reaching plan to safeguard the forests by banning new road building throughout much of the system, the Tongass has a curious distinction: it is the one national forest specifically exempted from such a ban.There are already more than 4,000 miles of logging roads snaking through the rain forest here, built as part of the nation's most heavily subsidized logging program, one that costs taxpayers about $30 million a year but is fiercely defended by Alaska's tiny but powerful Congressional delegation.With 400 miles of new federal logging roads slated to be built in the Tongass rain forest over the next four years, the exemption has already set off a battle between national environmental groups and the timber industry.And here in southeast Alaska, where the tourism industry now outpaces timber as a source of jobs, the debate over whether to build more logging roads in the world's largest remaining stretch of temperate rain forest is also surprisingly spirited, in a way that would have been unthinkable a generation ago when logging was firmly seen as the great spur to jobs in the sparsely populated area.While logging interests complain that environmental restrictions have already cost the region hundreds of good jobs over the years and closed down two big mills, many of those who make their money by guiding tourists and sport fishers through the spectacular inlets and past the emerald forests favor more protections, and even an end to any clear-cutting in the Tongass.And while just about everyone here agrees that America's largest, wildest national forest holds great resources, the core question in the debate is this: just how much of an economic resource is untouched wilderness?''A lot of Alaskans don't like what we are inevitably becoming -- a place where people come to see it, rather than to exploit it,'' said Richard Nelson, a writer and cultural anthropologist who is on the board of the Sitka Conservation Society, an environmental group that wants to include the Tongass in President Clinton's ban on new road building.''The whole frontier philosophy, the whole conquest-of-wilderness mentality, is certainly alive and well here,'' Mr. Nelson said. ''But there is a whole opposite ethic that is growing fast.''There is no question that much of the battle over what to do with the Tongass will be fought in Washington.For environmentalists, ''leaving the Tongass out of this plan is like deciding to protect all national parks except Yellowstone,'' said Matthew Zencey, the Washington-based manager of the Alaska Rainforest Campaign, an umbrella coalition that hopes to have much of the forest protected by a road ban.The timber industry is similarly animated, saying the Tongass is already subject to a federal ''management plan'' that balances wilderness protection in the area with a prudent amount of logging. The administration, in fact, cited that plan in exempting Tongass from its road restrictions, although other areas also have management plans. But critics of the exemption have suggested that the administration was merely trying to avoid picking a fight with Alaska's senators, who both lead committees that have authority over the forest service.But as the land use struggle ensues thousands of miles away, people who live here are also clearly divided over whether the forest is chiefly useful for timber, or tourism, or both in equal measure.In Sitka, for instance, the onetime capital of Russian America that is ringed by forests, sea and a snow-covered volcano on a nearby island, the city split a few years ago (1,702 against, 1,068 for) when a nonbinding measure was put on the local ballot to make it the city's official policy to oppose clear-cutting in the nearby national forest.Both tourism and fishing now outrank the timber industry as a source of jobs in southeast Alaska, according to the state's Department of Labor and Workforce Development, a situation that is radically different from the case 25 years ago and that logging officials attribute to protections that environmentalists have already secured for the Tongass.One came in the Carter administration, setting aside more than five million acres as wilderness, and another in the Bush administration, when Congress agreed to phase out much of a subsidy that was allowing two major timber companies to pay as little as $2 for huge Sitka spruce logs that would fetch about $300 on the open market. The subsidy dated to the 1950's, when the United States Forest Service agreed to provide a steady supply of timber at low prices to two companies that agreed to build pulp mills in the area.Both of those mills are closed now -- one near here may be reconverted into a privately owned water-bottling plant, under a plan that is still being negotiated -- and the area now welcomes about 700,000 tourists every summer, more than double the number a decade ago. Many come in the cruise ships that glide by the magnificent scenery and dock in and around the coastal towns. Others come to fish with one of the dozens of guide companies that advertise their services in what many call ''the salmon capital of the world.''Tourism is all well and good, but there is no reason for that industry not to coexist with continued logging, said Senator Frank H. Murkowski, the Alaska Republican who is chairman of a committee that oversees natural resources.''So a tourist in Alaska comes in on a boat, and he gets off in Ketchikan or Juneau, and maybe spends a little money here, spends a little money there, and gets back on the boat,'' Mr. Murkowski said in a telephone interview from Washington. ''That's important. It's a significant contribution. But it's not sufficient. What we really do well is, we grow timber and we grow fish. And they're both renewable if you do it correctly.''Besides, he added: ''If we've done such a bad job with this forest in Alaska, then why is it still so scenic today for tourism? Why do so many people still want to come here?''Under the president's plan, the  Forest Service would ban road building in areas of the national forests where there are currently no roads. The plan would protect about 43 million acres that could be logged, roughly one-quarter of the 192 million acres in the national forest system. That would reduce planned timber harvests, now at about 3.6 billion board feet a year, by about 700 million board feet. (There are about 10,000 board feet of lumber in an average-size American home.)But under the administration's recently announced preference, no such ban would apply in the 17-million-acre Tongass forest, and a decision on whether to impose a ban would not be made until 2004.The Forest Service's program in the Tongass already operates at a deficit of about $30 million a year, meaning that the federal government pays that much more to build roads and maintain the forest than it takes in from timber companies, which grind most of the trees to a pulp that is sold for export.That subsidy used to be even larger, and the program remains popular in some quarters here.''Yes, we manage forests at a net loss for the taxpayer,'' said Bob Weinstein, the mayor of Ketchikan, a timber town at the southeastern tip of the state. ''But that doesn't bother me until such time as the United States government eliminates every direct or indirect subsidy for any business.''Mayor Weinstein, a visceral opponent of a road building ban in the Tongass, said logging areas were typically well out of the view of tourists anyway.''If there are cuts,'' he said, ''the Forest Service has made sure they can't be seen from passing cruise ships.''The lush growing areas most prized by logging companies, however, are precisely the same areas that are most critical for wildlife habitat, conservationists say. The region, roughly the size of West Virginia, has one of the largest concentrations of bald eagles and grizzly bears anywhere in the world and is also considered one of the largest stretches left of temperate (as opposed to tropical) rain forest.James Lyons, the assistant agriculture secretary in charge of the Forest Service, said the Tongass was exempted from a road ban under the recent proposal because it had already been subject to an intensive, yearslong review process that resulted in a 1997 ''management plan'' aimed at balancing wilderness protection with continued logging.Total logging in the forest now amounts to about 150 million board feet annually, having steadily dropped from a high of 590 million board feet in 1973. Environmental groups said that areas served by existing logging roads already provided enough land for a sustainable timber harvest, and that the road ban should be extended here.But Senator Murkowski said the logging statistics indicated that environmentalists had already gotten the upper hand in the Tongass.''Now they want it all,'' he said. ''Have you ever met with an environmental group that's satisfied? If they were satisfied, they wouldn't have a cause. They'd have to shut up shop and retire.''Logging industry officials also said they were extremely skeptical of environmentalists' claims that tourism would be the economic lifeblood of the area.''When they get finished shutting down logging, they're going to go after the cruise ships,'' said Jack Phelps, executive director of the Alaska Forest Association, a trade group based in Ketchikan. ''They think there're too many people coming here.''And, indeed, there is evidence that some Alaskans feel they are overrun with tourists: Juneau has slapped visitors' fees on those who arrive by boat, and Sitka residents voted down a proposal to build a dock that would have allowed more cruise ships to moor in town rather than out in the bay. (Many cruise ships offload their passengers onto smaller boats to bring them into town.)But Eric Jordan, a second-generation fisherman here in Sitka who also runs a guide business, said the local economy was stronger today than when the mill went out of business. The air and waters are much cleaner too, Mr. Jordan said.''When the mill actually closed and that cloud of smoke was lifted, both psychologically and literally, an amazing thing happened,'' he said. ''Property values shot up, and they've been going up ever since. The reality was more palatable than dealing with this constant threat that the economy would collapse if the mill went. I really think the psychology of the town has brightened in a lot of respects.''
After spending several weeks watching his opponent grab headlines and project a more moderate image, Vice President Al Gore is embarking on a new campaign strategy that will blend personal, biographical details with policy matters in his ongoing effort to reach voters on a human level.On Saturday, Mr. Gore is to give the commencement address to the 944 cadets graduating from the United States Military Academy at West Point. Aides said he would discuss both his plans for military preparedness and his experience as an Army enlistee in Vietnam.After spending several weeks watching his opponent grab headlines and project a more moderate image, Vice President Al Gore is embarking on a new campaign strategy that will blend personal, biographical details with policy matters in his ongoing effort to reach voters on a human level.On Saturday, Mr. Gore is to give the commencement address to the 944 cadets graduating from the United States Military Academy at West Point. Aides said he would discuss both his plans for military preparedness and his experience as an Army enlistee in Vietnam.He is expected to elaborate on his Army experience on Monday, Memorial Day, in a speech in western Pennsylvania. On Wednesday, he plans to hold a conference on mental health with his wife, Tipper, who has battled depression.On Thursday he is to give a major speech on cancer research at a time when scientists are completing work on the human genome project, a long-running interest of Mr. Gore's.  And on Friday he will speak about the responsibility of fathers.''Part of running for the presidency is introducing yourself to the American people,'' said Chris Lehane, the vice president's press secretary. ''People want to know about the experiences that influenced his thinking.''Mr. Gore has been introducing and reintroducing himself for some months, but some of his advisers worry that there is still a gap in voters' knowledge about him and that this is hurting him in comparisons with Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, his Republican rival.As a result, the Gore campaign and the Democratic National Committee are preparing television commercials, largely biographical, for which he has been taping scenes over the last few weeks. They will highlight his experiences outside of Washington, including his time in Tennessee as a divinity student and a journalist, and his family, including the fact that he has been married 30 years and is a new grandfather.''Vice presidents are famous but not well known,'' Mr. Lehane said. ''Most people's notion of him is standing behind a podium.''Elaine Kamark, Mr. Gore's domestic policy adviser, noted that since 1992 he has held annual conferences on topics related to the family, like medical care for children and stresses on the modern family. She said these policy discussions brought out the best in the vice president, and gave the greatest insight into both his character and his views about what was important.Ms. Kamark said these family issues ''combine both policy and his personal experiences as a parent, and you get a sense of how he would use the bully pulpit'' as president.Today Mr. Gore spent the day at the Cordova School, a 1,120-student magnet school here outside Memphis, his sixth such visit to schools around the country since the end of the primary season in March. His main message today, as it has been during previous school visits, was to emphasize the involvement of parents in their children's lives. The level of detail into which he becomes engrossed was evident in his response to a question about the behavior of children on school buses.''One of the school bus drivers in a school in North Carolina made a suggestion that might go to your question,'' Mr. Gore said. ''He said that when children bring home their report cards on how they are doing in their course work that they ought to get a grade in bus.''Mr. Gore's West Point appearance this weekend has prompted criticism from another veteran who wonders where the line is between allowing a vice president to address the academy if he is also a political candidate.Bob Dole, a World War II veteran who was the Republican presidential nominee in 1996, was invited informally five years ago to deliver a speech at the academy, Doug MacKinnon, Mr. Dole's spokesman, said in an interview. But Mr. MacKinnon  said the invitation was withdrawn ''at the last minute'' because it was deemed political. The academy, which allowed members of Congress to speak on the campus in the 1800's, now allows only the president, the vice president and the speaker of the House to address the cadets.''We have no ill will toward anyone,'' Mr. MacKinnon said. ''We just want to try to get clarification on the policy, what the rules are, who created the exceptions, why the Senate majority leader isn't on the list.''Maj. James Whaley, a spokesman for West Point, said in an interview that ''speaking at graduation is normally reserved for the president, vice president or speaker of the House, and Mr. Dole was a senator.''Asked how those who attend the ceremony might distinguish Mr. Gore the vice president from Mr. Gore the presidential candidate, Major Whaley said the vice president's right to speak ''to future leaders of our nation and our Army'' cannot be taken away from him because he is aspiring to higher office.The question by Republicans about Mr. Gore's appearance at the military academy seemed more of a warning than concern about the past, putting Mr. Gore and his campaign on notice that, say, using the platform of a service academy commencement, either for television commercials or political remarks, would cross a line.
In 1997, the Justice Department briefly looked into whether Attorney General Janet Reno should seek an independent counsel to investigate accusations that Louis J. Freeh, the director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, had lied to Congress, government and Congressional officials disclosed today.The preliminary inquiry concluded that Mr. Freeh did not intentionally mislead Congress when he gave an incorrect explanation as to why the head of the bureau's crime laboratory had been suspended. Instead, investigators concluded that Mr. Freeh had been misinformed, and they noted that he quickly corrected his error in a letter to Congress when it had been pointed out to him. As a result, they concluded, there was no need for any criminal investigation.In 1997, the Justice Department briefly looked into whether Attorney General Janet Reno should seek an independent counsel to investigate accusations that Louis J. Freeh, the director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, had lied to Congress, government and Congressional officials disclosed today.The preliminary inquiry concluded that Mr. Freeh did not intentionally mislead Congress when he gave an incorrect explanation as to why the head of the bureau's crime laboratory had been suspended. Instead, investigators concluded that Mr. Freeh had been misinformed, and they noted that he quickly corrected his error in a letter to Congress when it had been pointed out to him. As a result, they concluded, there was no need for any criminal investigation.Although the event occurred more than three years ago, the reasons and the way in which details about it surfaced this week involve the continuing battle between the Clinton Justice Department and Congressional Republicans over Ms. Reno's handling of accusations of fund-raising irregularities by Democrats in the 1996 presidential campaign.The preliminary inquiry involving Mr. Freeh was contained in documents sent by the Justice Department this week to the Senate and House judiciary committees, which are looking into Ms. Reno's decisions not to seek an independent counsel to investigate Democratic fund-raising.The decision not to seek an independent counsel for Mr. Freeh occurred just weeks before it appears Ms. Reno first declined to seek an independent counsel to investigate Democratic fund-raising.Senator Arlen Specter, a Pennsylvania Republican on the Judiciary Committee and an ardent critic of Ms. Reno, said the Justice Department had included the Freeh information for highly suspect reasons.''This information wasn't even in the scope of our subpoena for information,'' Mr. Specter said in an interview. ''It was gratuitously volunteered, and they did it to beat up Freeh a little bit and to help them defend their decision not to go after Gore.''Congressional Democrats declined to comment publicly on the matter.Mr. Specter said the Gore and Freeh situations were ''as different as night and day.'' Mr. Freeh, he said, was clearly shown to have made an innocent mistake and had corrected it quickly. The questions about Mr. Gore involve whether the vice president was telling the truth when he asserted he was unaware that his fund-raising efforts were aimed at raising money that is both limited and regulated by federal law.A Justice Department spokeswoman said the material disclosing the preliminary inquiry about Mr. Freeh was part of a larger document that was directly responsive to the Judiciary Committee's request for information about the campaign fund-raising investigation.''The Senate Judiciary Committee, at the request of Senator Specter requested this body of material,'' said Carole Florman of the Justice Department. ''It was therefore produced to the committee under the accommodation that balances the department's longstanding interest in maintaining confidentiality of our deliberative material and the need for Congressional oversight.''Over the years, Ms. Reno, who was once a supporter of the independent counsel law, was believed to have become gradually disenchanted with it. Although she began to seek independent prosecutors less often at the time she declined to do so for Mr. Freeh, she made her most controversial decision nearly a year later when she authorized Kenneth W. Starr, the Whitewater prosecutor, to look into accusations involving Mr. Clinton and Monica S. Lewinsky.In a statement today, Ms. Reno said that under the independent counsel law that expired last June, the department had no choice but to begin an inquiry into Mr. Freeh's Congressional testimony. She said that ''Director Freeh made an unintentional mistake'' and that she had the utmost respect for his integrity.At the time of the preliminary inquiry into whether he had intentionally misled Congress, Mr. Freeh was an outspoken advocate within government circles for the appointment of an independent counsel to investigate the Democrats, especially Vice President Gore.
INTERNATIONALA2-7Election Monitor Leaves Peru, Citing Deception  The head of the Organization of American States observation team, Eduardo Stein, left Peru two days before the presidential runoff election that he was to monitor. Mr. Stein said his team, which instructed its observers to leave the country, had been deceived by Peruvian officials.A5Lebanon May Accept Finding  The United Nations Middle East envoy, Terje Roed Larsen, said Lebanon had indicated that it would abide by a United Nations certification of Israel's withdrawal from the zone that it formerly occupied.A4Demonstrations in Belgrade  Several thousand students, teachers and parents rallied to protest the closing of universities a week early. Students said the government of President Slobodan Milosevic was afraid of a student strike.A3Crucial Meeting for Irish Peace  Members of the 870-member ruling council of the Ulster Unionist party convene today for a vote that will either revive the Northern Ireland peace accord or finish it off.A2More U.N. Hostages Released  Liberia said Sierra Leone rebels had freed 180 more United Nations hostages. The United Nations said several bodies found this week were probably those of peacekeepers.A4Pakistan Tax Crackdown  Beginning today, soldiers and revenue officers acting on orders from the eight-month-old military government will start delivering tax survey forms to businesses and homes in 13 cities to try to learn who owes how much and make them pay.A6Haiti Frees Opposition Figure  Officials released former Senator Paul Denis without explanation, local radio reported, three days after he became one of many opposition politicians to be arrested since Sunday's elections. Mr. Denis, once a supporter of former President Jean- Bertrand Aristide, is now one of his outspoken critics and had run for re-election Sunday.(Reuters)World BriefingA6NATIONALA8-12, 16Clinton Orders Effort To Shield Coasts and Reefs  President Clinton announced initiatives intended to preserve fragile shoreline and threatened coral reefs. His order did not specify any areas, but did seek recommendations from federal agencies on what shorelines might be in need of limits on fishing, oil drilling, mining and dumping.A12Freeh Inquiry Was Weighed  In 1997, the Justice Department briefly looked into whether Attorney General Janet Reno should seek an independent counsel to investigate whether the F.B.I. director, Louis J. Freeh, had lied to Congress, officials said. Investigators concluded that Mr. Freeh had not intentionally misled Congress in his testimony.A12Gore's New Campaign Strategy  Vice President Al Gore is to begin a new tack today that will blend personal and biographical details with policy matters in an effort to reach voters on a human level.A10Bush Backs Vatican U.N. Status  Gov. George W. Bush took the side of the Vatican in a controversy over its status at the United Nations. The dispute stems largely from Vatican stands on issues involving family planning and abortion.A10Teacher Shot Dead at School  A seventh grader sent home for throwing water balloons returned and killed his 35-year-old teacher, the police in Lake Worth, Fla., said.A8Plea to Bar Executions  Cardinal Roger Mahony, the Roman Catholic archbishop of Los Angeles, has urged Gov. Gray Davis to impose a moratorium on executions and to appoint a bipartisan commission to study capital punishment.A8Religion JournalA11SCIENCE/HEALTHAdvance in Fighting Diabetes  Researchers in Canada report that transplants of insulin-producing cells have enabled eight patients with a severe form of the disease to stop taking insulin injections.A1NEW YORK/REGIONB1-72 Suspects Arrested In Restaurant Massacre  Two men with records of involvement in robberies were arrested in the robbery and execution-style shootings of seven workers in a Wendy's in Queens, five of whom died. The suspects were identified as John B. Taylor, who once worked at the outlet, and Craig Godineaux.A1Environmentalist Victory  A state judge in Queens ruled that New York City could not let developers install septic systems on steep hills around the city's upstate reservoirs. Environmentalists had asserted that the systems would pollute the city water supply.B1Lazio and Clinton on the Stump  Representative Rick A. Lazio said he would not resign his Congressional seat to run for the Senate. Hillary Rodham Clinton, campaigning on Long Island, Mr. Lazio's home base, received a union endorsement.B4OBITUARIESA13SPORTSD1-8Devils Advance to Finals  The Devils beat the Philadelphia Flyers, 2-1, to win the N.H.L. Eastern Conference series and advance to the Stanley Cup finals. The Devils were down three games to one at one point in the seven-game series.D1Lakers Take the Edge  Los Angeles beat the Portland Trail Blazers in Game 3 of the Western Conference finals, 93-91. The Lakers now lead the four-of-seven series, two games to one.D4ARTS & IDEASB9-18Questions of Attribution  At least 12 passages in Susan Sontag's new novel about a 19th-century actress, ''In America,'' resemble passages in four other books about Helena Modjeska, the Polish immigrant actress who inspired the novel. Ms. Sontag said a historical novel is ''a work of art'' that belongs to a new genre not requiring the footnotes of traditional histories.B9BUSINESS DAYC1-16Auto Insurance Rates Rising  Several big insurers -- including Progressive, Geico, State Farm and Allstate -- have begun raising car premiums, and analysts say that by the end of the year other leading companies are likely to follow.A1Turnaround in Asia  Hong Kong's economic output rose 14.3 percent in the first three months of the year, the latest evidence of a resurgence in Asian economies.A1U.S. Stands by Microsoft Plan  The Justice Department filed a modified version of its proposal to break up the company, one that included a handful of small, technical changes requested by the judge, who is expected to issue a final ruling soon.C1Struggling Insurer Is Sold  Reliance Group, the insurance company that supported Saul P. Steinberg's corporate raids for three decades, will be sold to Leucadia National for $295 million in stock and the assumption of $735 million in debt. The company had recently suffered big losses.C1Business DigestC1EDITORIALA14-15Editorials: Double-decker menace; the fuzzy abortion debate; Serbia's muzzled media; an odd veto.  Columns: Anthony Lewis.BridgeB17  TV ListingsB18  CrosswordB14  WeatherD8  Public LivesA8INTERNATIONALA2-7Election Monitor Leaves Peru, Citing Deception  The head of the Organization of American States observation team, Eduardo Stein, left Peru two days before the presidential runoff election that he was to monitor. Mr. Stein said his team, which instructed its observers to leave the country, had been deceived by Peruvian officials.A5Lebanon May Accept Finding  The United Nations Middle East envoy, Terje Roed Larsen, said Lebanon had indicated that it would abide by a United Nations certification of Israel's withdrawal from the zone that it formerly occupied.A4Demonstrations in Belgrade  Several thousand students, teachers and parents rallied to protest the closing of universities a week early. Students said the government of President Slobodan Milosevic was afraid of a student strike.A3Crucial Meeting for Irish Peace  Members of the 870-member ruling council of the Ulster Unionist party convene today for a vote that will either revive the Northern Ireland peace accord or finish it off.A2More U.N. Hostages Released  Liberia said Sierra Leone rebels had freed 180 more United Nations hostages. The United Nations said several bodies found this week were probably those of peacekeepers.A4Pakistan Tax Crackdown  Beginning today, soldiers and revenue officers acting on orders from the eight-month-old military government will start delivering tax survey forms to businesses and homes in 13 cities to try to learn who owes how much and make them pay.A6Haiti Frees Opposition Figure  Officials released former Senator Paul Denis without explanation, local radio reported, three days after he became one of many opposition politicians to be arrested since Sunday's elections. Mr. Denis, once a supporter of former President Jean- Bertrand Aristide, is now one of his outspoken critics and had run for re-election Sunday.(Reuters)World BriefingA6NATIONALA8-12, 16Clinton Orders Effort To Shield Coasts and Reefs  President Clinton announced initiatives intended to preserve fragile shoreline and threatened coral reefs. His order did not specify any areas, but did seek recommendations from federal agencies on what shorelines might be in need of limits on fishing, oil drilling, mining and dumping.A12Freeh Inquiry Was Weighed  In 1997, the Justice Department briefly looked into whether Attorney General Janet Reno should seek an independent counsel to investigate whether the F.B.I. director, Louis J. Freeh, had lied to Congress, officials said. Investigators concluded that Mr. Freeh had not intentionally misled Congress in his testimony.A12Gore's New Campaign Strategy  Vice President Al Gore is to begin a new tack today that will blend personal and biographical details with policy matters in an effort to reach voters on a human level.A10Bush Backs Vatican U.N. Status  Gov. George W. Bush took the side of the Vatican in a controversy over its status at the United Nations. The dispute stems largely from Vatican stands on issues involving family planning and abortion.A10Teacher Shot Dead at School  A seventh grader sent home for throwing water balloons returned and killed his 35-year-old teacher, the police in Lake Worth, Fla., said.A8Plea to Bar Executions  Cardinal Roger Mahony, the Roman Catholic archbishop of Los Angeles, has urged Gov. Gray Davis to impose a moratorium on executions and to appoint a bipartisan commission to study capital punishment.A8Religion JournalA11SCIENCE/HEALTHAdvance in Fighting Diabetes  Researchers in Canada report that transplants of insulin-producing cells have enabled eight patients with a severe form of the disease to stop taking insulin injections.A1NEW YORK/REGIONB1-72 Suspects Arrested In Restaurant Massacre  Two men with records of involvement in robberies were arrested in the robbery and execution-style shootings of seven workers in a Wendy's in Queens, five of whom died. The suspects were identified as John B. Taylor, who once worked at the outlet, and Craig Godineaux.A1Environmentalist Victory  A state judge in Queens ruled that New York City could not let developers install septic systems on steep hills around the city's upstate reservoirs. Environmentalists had asserted that the systems would pollute the city water supply.B1Lazio and Clinton on the Stump  Representative Rick A. Lazio said he would not resign his Congressional seat to run for the Senate. Hillary Rodham Clinton, campaigning on Long Island, Mr. Lazio's home base, received a union endorsement.B4OBITUARIESA13SPORTSD1-8Devils Advance to Finals  The Devils beat the Philadelphia Flyers, 2-1, to win the N.H.L. Eastern Conference series and advance to the Stanley Cup finals. The Devils were down three games to one at one point in the seven-game series.D1Lakers Take the Edge  Los Angeles beat the Portland Trail Blazers in Game 3 of the Western Conference finals, 93-91. The Lakers now lead the four-of-seven series, two games to one.D4ARTS & IDEASB9-18Questions of Attribution  At least 12 passages in Susan Sontag's new novel about a 19th-century actress, ''In America,'' resemble passages in four other books about Helena Modjeska, the Polish immigrant actress who inspired the novel. Ms. Sontag said a historical novel is ''a work of art'' that belongs to a new genre not requiring the footnotes of traditional histories.B9BUSINESS DAYC1-16Auto Insurance Rates Rising  Several big insurers -- including Progressive, Geico, State Farm and Allstate -- have begun raising car premiums, and analysts say that by the end of the year other leading companies are likely to follow.A1Turnaround in Asia  Hong Kong's economic output rose 14.3 percent in the first three months of the year, the latest evidence of a resurgence in Asian economies.A1U.S. Stands by Microsoft Plan  The Justice Department filed a modified version of its proposal to break up the company, one that included a handful of small, technical changes requested by the judge, who is expected to issue a final ruling soon.C1Struggling Insurer Is Sold  Reliance Group, the insurance company that supported Saul P. Steinberg's corporate raids for three decades, will be sold to Leucadia National for $295 million in stock and the assumption of $735 million in debt. The company had recently suffered big losses.C1Business DigestC1EDITORIALA14-15Editorials: Double-decker menace; the fuzzy abortion debate; Serbia's muzzled media; an odd veto.  Columns: Anthony Lewis.BridgeB17  TV ListingsB18  CrosswordB14  WeatherD8  Public LivesA8
THE REPUBLICANSBUSH BYPASSES TEXAS CONVENTION -- Gov. George W. Bush will skip the Texas Republican Party convention in Houston next month. The decision, reported in The Houston Chronicle on Friday, has prompted speculation that the decision grew out of skirmishes with conservative elements of the party, but Bush campaign aides insisted otherwise. ''The governor will be campaigning in Florida and Kentucky at that time,'' said Ray Sullivan, a campaign spokesman in Austin. ''But Laura Bush is planning to address the convention as his representative.'' Mr. Sullivan denied that there were any lingering problems with anti-abortion elements of the party that, during the 1996 Texas convention, stripped Mr. Bush of a governor's traditional role as leader of the state delegation to the national convention.Ross Milloy (NYT)THE REPUBLICANSBUSH BYPASSES TEXAS CONVENTION -- Gov. George W. Bush will skip the Texas Republican Party convention in Houston next month. The decision, reported in The Houston Chronicle on Friday, has prompted speculation that the decision grew out of skirmishes with conservative elements of the party, but Bush campaign aides insisted otherwise. ''The governor will be campaigning in Florida and Kentucky at that time,'' said Ray Sullivan, a campaign spokesman in Austin. ''But Laura Bush is planning to address the convention as his representative.'' Mr. Sullivan denied that there were any lingering problems with anti-abortion elements of the party that, during the 1996 Texas convention, stripped Mr. Bush of a governor's traditional role as leader of the state delegation to the national convention.Ross Milloy (NYT)NEIGHBORLY ADVICE -- Crawford High School in Crawford, Texas, had never had a commencement speaker until Gov. George W. Bush volunteered, choosing the Friday night event to say hello to his new neighbors. The Texas governor last year bought a ranch -- expected to be a sort of Western White House if he is elected -- about 7 miles west of Crawford, 115 miles southwest of Dallas. In his talk, Mr. Bush gave the 45 graduates some advice, including, ''I've learned that no matter how old you are or how important your job is you can never escape your mother.''(AP)THE SENATEA CAMPAIGN AGAINST GORTON -- Several Indian groups have advertisements planned that criticize Senator Slade Gorton, Republican of Washington, who is up for re-election, The Seattle Post-Intelligencer has reported. Mr. Gorton has long feuded with some tribes over fishing rights and sovereignty issues. The Indian groups said they expected to spend $1 million or more, with some of the money coming from tribes with gambling casinos in other states. Ron Allen, chairman of a tribe on the Olympic Peninsula of Washington, called Mr. Gorton ''the most vociferous opponent of tribal sovereignty that Congress has seen in 40 years.'' Mr. Gorton told The Post-Intelligencer: ''They have a total right to do what they want in the political world. I have a very good record on supporting the appropriate ambitions of Indian peoples, but I will continue to fiercely protect the rights of their non-Indian neighbors. If they don't like that, they have every right to try to beat me. They are not going to succeed.''Sam Howe Verhovek (NYT)ELECTION COMPLAINT IN NEVADA -- The Nevada Republican Party has filed a complaint with the Federal Election Commission over advertisements by a lawyer who is running for the Senate as a Democrat. The television and billboard advertisements do not mention the candidacy of the lawyer, Ed Bernstein, but focus instead on his law practice. But state Republican leaders say Mr. Bernstein's intention is to gain an unfair advantage over his opponent, Representative John Ensign. The Republicans say the promotions amount to illegal campaign contributions from his law firm. ''Bernstein has officially filed with the secretary of state and the F.E.C., however, his face remains on corporate-financed billboards across Nevada and his law firm commercials continue to air touting him as a caring person,'' said Ryan Erwin, executive director of Nevada's Republican Party. Mr. Bernstein said the advertisements have no connection to the campaign. The latest billboard, with a legal assistant saying ''Ed Bernstein cares,'' went up this week.(AP)
THOMAS KUHNA Philosophical History for Our Times.By Steve Fuller.472 pp. Chicago:The University of Chicago Press. $35.THOMAS KUHNA Philosophical History for Our Times.By Steve Fuller.472 pp. Chicago:The University of Chicago Press. $35.One of the few books that most college graduates in this anticanonical age are expected to have heard of, if not to have read, is ''The Structure of Scientific Revolutions,'' by Thomas S. Kuhn. First published in 1962, when its author was a 40-year-old professor of history at Berkeley, it has been translated into two dozen languages and is cited in countless articles and books spanning virtually all social scientific and humanistic disciplines. Journalists report that it is Vice President Al Gore's favorite book. Yet ''The Structure of Scientific Revolutions'' was written for philosophers, not the general public. It is relentlessly academic. Dozens of more accessible books about science and its history are forgotten soon after they appear. Why did this treatise on scientific development become one of the most influential academic books of the 20th century? The question is given point by the fact that most defenders of this book, to say nothing of its critics, acknowledge that many of its arguments are flawed.One person who thinks he has the whole Kuhn episode figured out is Steve Fuller, a philosophically trained sociologist at the University of Warwick in England. In ''Thomas Kuhn: A Philosophical History for Our Times,'' Fuller asserts that most people who take Kuhn seriously just aren't very clever: Kuhn's book is so vague as to be an inkblot; people make of it what they will. This has long been one standard answer to the question of Kuhn's popularity. Kuhn was a lightweight, in this telling, and his influence is a sign of our ostensibly dreadful times, when even the learned can't tell a mediocre mind from an intellectual giant. A second answer, also of long standing, is that ''The Structure of Scientific Revolutions'' contained a lot of good ideas about how science works. In this view, Kuhn's ability to speak effectively to certain specific interests compensated for the holes in his analysis, and made it possible for people who were not fools to get a great deal out of the book.Both answers begin with the same basic understanding of how Kuhn challenged inherited views of science. Before Kuhn, most people understood scientific progress in terms of a series of heroic individual discoveries that contributed to an accumulating body of knowledge warranted, ultimately, by nature itself. Kuhn argued that tightly organized communities of specialists, not individual minds, were the central actors in scientific development, and that these communities made progress in two distinctive modes. In ''normal science,'' researchers did narrow, technical work guided by a ''paradigm,'' a view of the field that served as a set of predictions for what investigators would find. When these researchers observed, instead, a lot of things that did not fit, the community entered a period of ''revolutionary science.'' In this mode, the community debated the utility of alternative paradigms and eventually selected one that explained a greater range of relevant phenomena and promised to guide the next phase of normal science.Kuhn went on to suggest that scientific development is best seen not as progress toward a fixed goal set by nature but as progress from existing knowledge toward more fully confirmed answers to questions scientists put to nature. Since the questions themselves sometimes change, the progress of science is discontinuous.But most philosophers and historians soon came to the conclusion that Kuhn's signature concept of the paradigm was frustratingly vague. They generally agreed, too, that his pivotal distinction between revolutionary and normal science was hard to sustain. Even some of the great revolutions in biology and physics, moreover, proved hard to shoehorn into his model. Many thinkers who were convinced by Kuhn's case for the historical contingency of scientific truth conceded that his formulations were too ambiguous to play more than a heuristic role in the conversation about ''relativism'' he had stimulated.Fuller carries the dismissal of Kuhn and his sympathetic readers to a snide extreme. Kuhn himself, who died in 1996 as an emeritus professor at M.I.T., emerges from Fuller's account as a well-meaning simpleton. Fuller explicitly compares him to Chance, the character played by Peter Sellers in the movie ''Being There,'' based on Jerzy Kosinski's novel. Chance finds himself in a conversation he does not quite understand, and says things that other people misinterpret as profound because they believe he is someone else. Kuhn's relation to his audience, Fuller declares, is ''a similar comedy of errors.'' Kuhn was the proverbial dwarf standing on the shoulders of giants. From a distance, ''the dwarf may look like the head of the tallest giant.''Fuller provides glimpses of a potentially provocative analysis of the political matrix of Kuhn's popularity. But he implausibly attributes to personal connections much of Kuhn's rise to prominence, as if readers cared that Kuhn was a protege of James B. Conant, a former president of Harvard University. Fuller's Kuhn is also a political cat's-paw for the more worldly Conant, whom Fuller presents as a defender of Big Science who was happy with an image of science as too specialized and autonomous to be subject to public control. Fuller sees ''The Structure of Scientific Revolutions'' as ''an exemplary document of the cold war era,'' and says its chief impact has been ''to dull the critical sensibility of the academy.''''Thomas Kuhn: A Philosophical History for Our Times'' is nearly unreadable by any but the most devoted maven of the sectarian disputes between specialists in the sociology and philosophy of science. Copious and polemical footnotes exhaust even a professional reader's patience. If a prize were awarded to the academic who persuaded a major publisher to accept the most footnotes citing himself, Fuller would be a strong contender. He makes almost no effort to explore the numerous substantial justifications for the second, more generous explanation for Kuhn's influence. Kuhn spoke directly, if unintentionally, to a widespread honest curiosity about how science related to the psychology and politics of nonscientific experience.Kuhn emphasized the power of pre-conceived ideas to control the observations of scientists, and insisted that without the focusing effect of these ideas investigators would not be able actually to see the phenomena the explanation of which was essential to the creating of new knowledge. A fully ''open'' mind cannot focus on the relevant particulars. What made this contribution so important was the widespread presumption that scientists, rather than being bound by preconceptions, were open-minded in the sense of always questioning inherited ideas. Kuhn's emphasis was not unique among his generation's theorists of science.But Kuhn developed the point compellingly with concrete examples and with a social-psychological language that enabled a range of readers to grasp the function of provisionally unquestioned presuppositions. What was equally important, he assimilated the behavior of scientific communities into popularly understood theories of the dynamics of other human communities while simultaneously offering an account of the distinctiveness of the most technically developed of natural sciences.HE applied to science a vocabulary normally used to describe political actors, especially during revolutions. Communities of scientists, like political communities, were organized by certain traditions that periodically came under strain and were then revised, sometimes sweepingly. The leaders of both kinds of communities were genuine wielders of power, who used their positions to bring their constituencies into line.But, while Kuhn thus opened up the entire domain of science for political analysis, he argued that the behaviorally visible mark of a truly scientific community was its high degree of autonomy, its ability to exercise authority over its own intellectual affairs. He confirmed the instinct that science was ''really different.'' But he also showed that scientists, within their domain, behaved very much like the rest of us.''The Structure of Scientific Revolutions'' presented the strongest case ever made for the dependence of valid science on distinctively constituted, historically particular human communities. Far from dulling the academy's critical capacities, Kuhn directed those capacities at scientific communities that were previously spared the searching scrutiny he inspired. He demystified science without degrading it, and in so doing he saw beyond previous theorists of science without denigrating them.David A. Hollinger teaches history at the University of California, Berkeley. His most recent book is ''Science, Jews, and Secular Culture.''
I STOOD shivering, as quietly as I could, as afternoon shadows stretched across the river around us. The water was above my waist, lapping at the bib of my neoprene coveralls, and there was nothing to insulate me from the conclusion that I was out of my depth. Barely 20 feet away my adversary had begun to taunt me, rising to the surface to slurp down every defenseless bug around -- save the imposter at the end of my line. I cast my rod again, a bit less awkwardly. Again I was ignored.I reminded myself that we had come to this far corner of northern California for more than just the fish. My father and I had both been tempted by friends' stories about the spare beauty of the place, the open spaces and the quiet.I STOOD shivering, as quietly as I could, as afternoon shadows stretched across the river around us. The water was above my waist, lapping at the bib of my neoprene coveralls, and there was nothing to insulate me from the conclusion that I was out of my depth. Barely 20 feet away my adversary had begun to taunt me, rising to the surface to slurp down every defenseless bug around -- save the imposter at the end of my line. I cast my rod again, a bit less awkwardly. Again I was ignored.I reminded myself that we had come to this far corner of northern California for more than just the fish. My father and I had both been tempted by friends' stories about the spare beauty of the place, the open spaces and the quiet.Hours into our first encounter with fly fishing, we seemed already to be sloughing off some outer skin of our city lives. A few days of this, we figured, would be a nice chance to spend some time together without much else going on. We might even learn to handle a fly rod.Not so long before, I had felt proudly immune to the plague of fly-fishing madness that followed Robert Redford's film ''A River Runs Through It.'' Surely, I thought, life was too short to spend whole, tedious hours of it fashioning little ersatz bugs. Not to mention the countless innocent trout that would be quarry for stockbrokers got up like Brad Pitt.Several years passed, though, and the fad faded. I found myself being preached to by a couple of friends whose commitment to the sport apparently involved some secret vow to convert others; my qualms began to erode. But there were still hurdles: the expensive fishing gear, the various complex knots, the abiding mystery of the ersatz bugs.Our solution was a company called Clearwater Trout Tours. Clearwater runs both a guiding service and a fly-fishing school out of a small inn on Hat Creek, an hour's drive east from Redding and at the center of some of the best wild trout waters in the west. Many of its customers are anglers who know what they're doing and can choose where they want to do it.But the company and its proprietor, Dick Galland, have a strong pedagogical bent, and they offer instruction that ranges from basic techniques to a course for experts called The Enlightened Master.The standard beginners' class that we took first, in the fall of 1997, was called Mastering the Art of Fly Fishing. Given that we started after lunch on a Wednesday and finished up at noon the following Sunday, mastery was hardly in the cards. But our instructors balanced their respect for the sport's complexities with an attitude that we ought to learn quickly enough to enjoy the experience, catch some fish and be able to venture out again on our own.After our first few hours, I wondered whether this wasn't like taking a quick Berlitz course in Chinese. Our class of six -- my father and I; a businessman from Los Angeles and his daughter, a radio executive; and a married couple in their late 30's -- had assembled around a big wooden table in the main dining room of the lodge. Our instructors passed out handbooks, and they looked encouragingly thin. But by the sixth page the booklet was already diagramming something called a ''double-surgeon's knot.'' By page 21 it was advising on the proper deployment of a ''slip-bobber and minjig combination.'' Then we started to practice some basic knots, and I was reminded why I'd never made it to Weebelo.Fly fishing is essentially an elaborate fraud. It is perpetrated by choosing a faux bug to match whatever the fish are eating, disguising the bug's provenance with a very thin nylon line, and then serving up line and bug with an elegance that would test the best Parisian waiters. Trout are not as dumb as they look: if the end of one's line is not assembled of the proper monofilament and properly turned knots, it will slop down before a fish with all the subtlety of a burger at Hooters.Surprisingly enough, though, even the double-surgeon's knot turned out to be doable. After a while, the tackle started to seem less complicated. A lesson on different kinds of trout water was altogether understandable, and we began to relax. Then we went outside.From the sleepy two-lane road that runs through the center of Cassel, Calif. (that is, the post office, the fire station and a small general store), we hadn't at first noticed the long, smooth lawn behind Clearwater's hedges. The grass turned out to be very well suited to the practice of fly casting, and we practiced for quite a while, catching many trees. The rule of our group seemed to be that the less strength one had, the more quickly one grasped the rhythm and stroke that would turn the line overhead in a tight, graceful curve and then roll it out so that the fly dropped delicately at its outstretched end.Before the sun had set, we were all tired enough to retire to the lodge for popcorn and beer. Clearwater House is a modest but comfortable place, furnished with arts and crafts pieces and decorated with fishing photographs and river maps. The end tables are stacked with copies of The New Yorker and National Geographic; the book shelves are filled with volumes like ''The Way of a Trout,'' and the encyclopedic ''Caddisflies.'' Old jazz plays on the stereo. The seven guest rooms are fairly small; most have twin beds and all have private baths. Guests can help themselves to homemade cookies and fresh coffee in the dining room or to juice and soft drinks from a refrigerator on the enclosed back porch.Breakfasts and dinners, served around big tables in the front and back of the house, were never elegant but always good. In the evenings we fished along a nearby stretch of Hat Creek, with Mount Lassen rising in the distance, or watched such classics of fish video as ''Anatomy of a Trout Stream'' (in which case about half of us usually fell asleep on the living room couches). A more adventurous night might consist of a trip to the 50's-era bowling lanes in the nearby town of Burney, or a drink at the old hotel in Fall River Mills.For our first long day on the water our two guides and their apprentice chose a stretch of lower Hat Creek that was shady and relatively slow. The trout were rising so infrequently that I couldn't help wondering about our chances. But by scooping a large screen into the water, our guides were able to show us what they might be eating below the surface: the tiny underwater form of aquatic insects, known as nymphs.Duly prepared, we embarked on the practice of ''short-line nymphing.'' This involved casting tiny nymphlike flies upstream and a few feet below the surface with the aid of a tiny lead weight that we attached near the end of the line. We had been instructed to watch our lines closely as the fly drifted with the current, and to set the hook deftly at the slightest sign of line being tugged.It was the deft-setting-of-the-hook part that took some work. Although we fished with small fluorescent indicators stuck on our lines -- the training wheels of short-line nymphing -- the slightest pull from a submerged rock or weed was generally enough to prompt us to rip our rods skyward, as in one of those television fishing shows in which the angler hooks a huge marlin. Unfortunately, the technique turns out to be both ineffective for catching trout and unhelpful in keeping one's balance on the slick rocks of the riverbed.The ethic at Clearwater and at most other fly fishing schools is ''catch and release.'' This means no trout dinners. More important, it means that the tiny hooks on the flies have no barbs, making it imperative that one keep the line taut once a fish finds the end of it.My own experience was that the rare, hooked trout liked to swim frantically in all directions. This generally prompted shouts from the nearest guide about proper positioning, and I usually responded to this instruction by joining my fish in a wild, thrashing dance that must have looked something like Joe Cocker on speed.OUR guides would not have passed central casting. I had expected weathered older men in goofy, fly-blown hats, spooning out fish wisdom like cough syrup. Instead we got Mike Peters, an erstwhile ski-racing coach from Mammoth, Calif., and Scott Saiki, a 27-year-old Hawaiian-born surfer and snowboarder whose command of fly fishing technique was impressive even to his fellow guides. Both were as patient as they were knowledgeable (and our second visit to Clearwater last summer suggested that they were by no means the exception).Clearwater's owner, Dick Galland, was a pioneer in some of the early Outward Bound programs in Colorado and Texas, and one of his earliest ventures in fishing instruction was a course he taught in San Francisco in the late 1970's called Zen and the Art of Fly Fishing. There is nothing too touchy-feely about Clearwater's approach these days, but the emphasis remains clearly on how one learns to fly-fish rather than on how many one might catch.This began to make clearer sense to me on the third day of our ''mastering'' class. We set off for a lower section of the Pit River, a place that our guides referred to portentously as the Pit. The fish beckoned to us from about 300 feet below the road, in water that cut through a canyon spread with brilliant fall colors.Wading slowly through the strong current, fighting to keep our balance, it seemed that fly fishing had become a contact sport. Then, wherever we stopped, it was as though we were meeting the fish all over again, this time with the proper introductions. Our nymphing began to look less awkward, and most of us actually caught a few fish.The next afternoon we found ourselves in an even more spectacular setting, a spot along Hat Creek called Carbon Flats. Iridescent grasses glowed in the clear water, and even from the banks above we could see big silvery shapes working their way lazily upstream. These trout, it turned out, were some of the most famously coy fish in the west. But by then we were all casting well enough to be satisfied just to stand in the slow current, soak in the sun, and practice. When a few fish began to strike, we shared the thrill.Carbon was no less compelling when my father and I returned on our second trip to Clearwater early last summer. This time we took a couple of old friends who had been fly fishing for years, and the four of us shared the wisdom and humor of two of the lodge's most experienced guides, Tom Peppas and Art Teter.As spectacular as it had been to see this swatch of northern California at the peak of its autumn foliage, June was even better. The days were warm and long and we switched from neoprene waders to lighter, more comfortable Gore-Tex versions from the Clearwater rental shop. We returned to the Pit to do some more full-impact nymphing, and then spent a quiet, enjoyable day learning to fish from skiffs on the Fall River.Almost from the start I wished that I had put in a little practice on my casting and knot-tying in the interim. But part of the joy of fishing with guides was that we could brush up as we went. If anything, Tom and Art were too accommodating, helping us out of so many tangles (literal and figurative) that I was afraid we weren't working hard enough.In the end, we felt that our mastering course had given us enough confidence to go on fishing. The knots no longer felt so complex, and we could start thinking about finer points like when to change from one type of fly to another. But none of that seemed to matter much when we went back to Carbon Flats. The setting was again magnificent, and even on a Saturday morning, we had the crystalline river all to ourselves. The trout, however, seemed to see me coming.This time, summoning all the delicacy I could, I cast again and again to what seemed like a perfect spot, just ahead of my fat prize. And the fish rose once again to taunt me, eating every bug in sight save mine.How to be outsmarted by a troutArranging an ExpeditionFor information about Clearwater Trout Tours, contact the company at Clearwater, Box 90, Cassel, Calif. 96016 or call (415) 381-1173 (especially in the winter months) or (530) 335-5500. The lodge is open for guided fishing from the beginning of the trout season in late April until it ends in November. Classes usually run from early May until October.Clearwater can be reached from San Francisco (just under six hours by car), from Sacramento (about five hours) and from Reno (slightly less than three hours).ClassesThe basic ''mastering'' class costs $995 a person for four nights' lodging, all meals, equipment rental and instruction. There are also intermediate and expert-level courses for both men and women, as well as three courses designed for women, including a women-only ''mastering'' course. Students must buy their own flies and some of their own tackle and fishing licenses, at an added cost of about $100 for the course. Tips to the lodge staff (10 percent of meal and accommodation charges per guest) and the guides ($50 to $90 per guest) are customary but optional.Private guiding packages are available throughout the season for $315 a person, including all meals and overnight lodging (double occupancy). Intermediate and expert courses are taught every other month. In winter the company frequently runs fishing tours to such places as New Zealand's South Island, which is famous for its brown trout, and Christmas Island in the south Pacific, a mecca for bonefishing.EquipmentFly fishing is the gift that keeps on costing. Expect to pay in the $500 range for a good rod and about $200 for a good reel. Not to mention the vest, the waders (neoprene or Gore-Tex, depending on the water temperature and the season), the wading boots and the tackle. The lodge sells fine equipment in its store, but neither the guides nor anyone else made any perceptible push to sell it.TIM GOLDENTIM GOLDEN is an investigative reporter for The Times.
BECAUSE it is so contentious, the debate over reforming Social Security draws plenty of attention. So it is easy to overlook that Congress has just reformed Social Security -- enacting a change that should have been contentious but somehow wasn't.For the first time, workers in their late 60's have the choice of collecting a full pension regardless of what they earn. That can backfire. What America's senior citizens decide to do with this choice will affect their level of income -- or poverty -- in deep old age. Because of the way the new law plays to human nature, many might make the wrong choice, taking too much pension now and not enough later. Some already  have.BECAUSE it is so contentious, the debate over reforming Social Security draws plenty of attention. So it is easy to overlook that Congress has just reformed Social Security -- enacting a change that should have been contentious but somehow wasn't.For the first time, workers in their late 60's have the choice of collecting a full pension regardless of what they earn. That can backfire. What America's senior citizens decide to do with this choice will affect their level of income -- or poverty -- in deep old age. Because of the way the new law plays to human nature, many might make the wrong choice, taking too much pension now and not enough later. Some already  have.''Waiting to collect benefits is basically betting that you will live beyond the average life expectancy,'' said Peter Orszag, an economist and Social Security expert at the University of California at Berkeley. That average for people who are already 65 is 81 for men and 84 for women, and rising for both. ''When you give people in their late 60's the choice of collecting their Social Security benefits now, then you raise the odds of their being poor in real old age.''The mechanics are simple enough. Previously, people between 65 and 70 who earned more than $17,000 a year had their Social Security pension benefits reduced, and those who earned $52,000 a year or more had them postponed entirely, until they turned 70. As a quid pro quo, the monthly pension checks they ultimately received were higher.Now people in their late 60's can earn any amount and still draw full pensions. But the old quid pro quo survives: people can still voluntarily wait until 70 to get larger checks thereafter. Those who take their pensions at 65 get a head start in total benefits paid, but those who wait will overtake them in their 80's, and the longer they live, the wider the gap will grow.The monthly payment at 70, for example, would be $1,300 for someone who passed up $1,000 at 65.Congress had been moving gradually in this direction, but the new legislation, signed by President Clinton April 7, completed the process in one leap. As a byproduct in this election year, the Social Security Administration expects to deliver $6 billion in extra pension money.But that is politics. The real issues are work incentives and adequate income in very old age, particularly the latter. It is still possible to postpone collecting pension benefits until age 70, but hardly anyone has chosen to do so. Of 419,000 registered wage earners in their late 60's who were collecting either reduced benefits or none at all when the new law took effect, only 800 are still holding off until age 70.WHAT does not mean the others have all actively chosen not to wait; many were probably swept passively onto the benefit rolls. To minimize its clerical work, the Social Security Administration sent out letters announcing that all 419,000 would receive full benefits automatically, unless they called a toll-free number and specifically opted to wait. Getting through on the often-busy phone line was not easy.People who wanted to wait could also have sent back their first checks. But in defiance of a main tenet of mainstream economics, that people make rational decisions in their best interest, hardly anyone returned the checks. ''People in their 60's in good health whose parents lived long lives should rationally choose to defer,'' said Henry Aaron, a senior fellow at the Brookings Institution. ''But there is a tendency to want your money now.'' Particularly when it is in hand and substantial; the first checks averaged $3,500, retroactively covering the first four months of the year.There is a second irrational tendency among people drawing both paychecks and benefit checks: to spend the pension rather than save for future retirement, increasing the odds of poverty later. But Congress gave in to an irrational outcry from working people in their late 60's who complained with growing frequency that withholding benefits was an unjust ''tax'' on work.''There is a real misperception out there that when the money is withheld it is gone; they will never see it again,'' said Kenneth S. Apfel, commissioner of Social Security. ''The number of seniors who perceive this is not insignificant.''So Congress acted. Federal surpluses helped to make the action politically palatable. So did another misperception: that in a robust economy suffering labor shortages, removing the earnings limits would encourage senior citizens to work a lot more. The most optimistic studies fail to support this contention. Hours worked will rise 5 percent at most, or roughly the equivalent of 50,000 full-time workers a year. That is what today's strong economy absorbs in a week.Maybe there is a lesson here for judging the Gore and Bush proposals for Social Security reform: Look for the misperceptions.ECONOMIC VIEW
The good news about education has become obvious: the quality of public schools is now on center stage in national politics. From George Bush and Al Gore down to aspirants for state and local office, all politicians have embraced the cause of high standards and excellence. The bad news is that the remedy everyone but teachers and pupils wants to prescribe is more testing.The mistrust of schools and teachers has become so widespread that the only politically viable solution seems to be to impose more standardized tests. Forty-nine states have now adopted curriculum standards that explicitly require testing in order to measure the performance of pupils, teachers, principals, and superintendents; by 2003, 26 states will have mandatory statewide tests for high school graduation. As a nation, we now administer at least 500,000 different kinds of standardized tests a year.The good news about education has become obvious: the quality of public schools is now on center stage in national politics. From George Bush and Al Gore down to aspirants for state and local office, all politicians have embraced the cause of high standards and excellence. The bad news is that the remedy everyone but teachers and pupils wants to prescribe is more testing.The mistrust of schools and teachers has become so widespread that the only politically viable solution seems to be to impose more standardized tests. Forty-nine states have now adopted curriculum standards that explicitly require testing in order to measure the performance of pupils, teachers, principals, and superintendents; by 2003, 26 states will have mandatory statewide tests for high school graduation. As a nation, we now administer at least 500,000 different kinds of standardized tests a year.Testing has also become big business. We spend more than $200 million a year on it. The market for standardized tests is growing faster than that for textbooks. Unfortunately, the two go together all too neatly; three publishing companies dominate the market for tests and textbooks alike.The tyranny of testing has become so intense that teachers may find themselves spending more than half the year teaching specifically for tests; their jobs and the standing of their schools are on the line. Not surprisingly, some teachers in New York and Maryland have been accused of cheating to improve their pupils' test scores.The problem is that our mode of testing is primitive and out of date. We still adhere to the so-called ''objective,'' machine-readable examinations pioneered in the mid-1950's. In the case of the Regents examination in New York, the questions themselves are often confusing or deliberately obscure and sometimes even embody errors.Who, after all, is writing our English and mathematics tests? Not our leading writers, scholars and mathematicians. Furthermore, we still confuse speed with competence. Knowledge and understanding are not about rapid reflexes; learning is not a sport. Quickness of recall does not indicate depth of understanding.Nor do all pupils know the right answer in the same manner or get the wrong answer or fail to grasp something the same way. Knowledge and skills are always approximations. A pupil who confuses World War I with World War II knows something more than one who mistakes World War I for the American Revolution. Today's testing instruments do not effectively account for how and what pupils know.Even worse, they are not designed  to measure the rate of change in each test taker. When we go for a medical checkup, we are evaluated not only in terms of an objective standard of health but on the progress or deterioration in our own particular bodies since the last examination.The most egregious aspect of our mania for testing is that pupils never find out what they got wrong and why they got it wrong. High school students taking the Regents exams in New York do not get their tests back; neither do the vast majority of millions of children taking Iowa and Stanford tests or statewide reading exams. Most often, even the teachers don't get the results back in time to help them in their teaching.What is the use of test results that are released months later, measuring a classroom, a school, a district or a state in terms of aggregate test scores? Would we tolerate a system in sports where the calls of umpires and linesmen remained a secret until the next season and the hits and errors of particular players were never revealed or justified?In Texas, studies have shown that weeks after taking the Texas Assessment of Academic skills test created in the 1990's, pupils fail to show the apparent mastery of knowledge registered when they first took the tests.Testing can and must be linked to learning. A mistake (and right answers) must be analyzed and corrected immediately for each pupil individually, just the way we respond when we teach sports and music. As it stands today, testing is little more than an adult political obsession that just results in more tests and profits for test makers.Yet we now possess the means to change testing fundamentally. Rapid advances in computers and declining costs make powerful new technologies, once reserved for government and industry, accessible: technology involving complex computer simulation, as in pilot training, and manipulation of data. We can design tests that are interactive in a way that both helps learning and raises the standards of education. Even for young children, it would be possible to throw away the No. 2 pencils and machine-scanned answer sheets, and have the student tested at the computer itself.There needs to be an initiative between government and the software industry to develop a new generation of tests. Programs can be written that inform the test taker immediately why the answer was right or wrong and that lead the pupil through the logic of the question to confirm understanding or correct ignorance. Politicians and school boards can still get their treasured measurements of timed test scores; as players are timed in  a chess game, the clock for each test taker can stop and start as the individual goes through every question, discovering how and why he or she arrived at answers.Computers also make it possible to measure the rate of change for each pupil -- indicating not only the student's progress but the teacher's effectiveness. Diagnostic tests at the beginning of each year can be designed that reveal what a pupil can and cannot do or does and does not know, establishing a baseline. If in the same classroom one fifth grader reads only at a second-grade level and another on an eighth-grade level, a teacher should be evaluated by what is learned by each of them over the course of a year.Connecting testing to learning could also free teachers from forced adherence to bland state-approved textbooks. They would be given the opportunity to select and choose materials that meet the needs of each pupil. They would be able to justify the sort of differentiated, case-by-case decisions for which true professionals should be trained.Reforming testing practices to make all this happen, however, will not be easy. Because software companies and the entrenched testing and textbook industry respond to short-term profit motives, public investment will be required for the longer-term work of adapting computer technologies to a new kind of testing.Without a radical reform in the way we test, there will be no improvement in learning and educational standards. We can bridge the gap between those who are passionate about measuring standards and those who are ideologically opposed to testing as discriminatory and unfair.What our politicians are offering us now is more of the same: a misguided reliance on a monopoly in a pseudoscience of testing that defines teaching and depresses learning.Leon Botstein, the president of Bard College, is the author of ''Jefferson's Children: Education and the Promise of American Culture.''
Gov. George W. Bush of Texas has loads of plans, and they are beginning to make some Democrats nervous.The presumptive Republican nominee set out some ideas on reducing nuclear weapons, the latest in a series of pronouncements over the past several weeks on everything from Social Security to moving the United States Embassy in Israel from Tel Aviv to Jerusalem.Gov. George W. Bush of Texas has loads of plans, and they are beginning to make some Democrats nervous.The presumptive Republican nominee set out some ideas on reducing nuclear weapons, the latest in a series of pronouncements over the past several weeks on everything from Social Security to moving the United States Embassy in Israel from Tel Aviv to Jerusalem.That Vice President Al Gore has assumed a more passive posture in articulating his agenda has not been lost on his own party. And some of his supporters, with an eye on Mr. Bush's rising poll numbers, began expressing their anxieties publicly.''People are starting to ask, 'When does he get started?' '' said Representative Charles B. Rangel, a New York Democrat.With two months until the Republicans meet in Philadelphia for the first of the two presidential nominating conventions, nerves are beginning to fray. The Republicans say the Democratic National Committee is about to start a big television campaign on behalf of Mr. Gore; the Democrats say the Republicans are already waging a television guerrilla war, with attack ads by special-interest groups on both the East and West Coasts.The National Rifle Association, in a boisterous convention in Charlotte, N.C., put the vice president on alert that it will organize gun owners against him. Holding a replica of a colonial musket in the air, Charlton Heston, the N.R.A. president, declared, ''I'll give up my gun when you take it from my cold, dead hands.''State Democratic leaders, meanwhile, descended on Nashville to plan and make their own declaration of solidarity. Some 72 party leaders from around the country met with Mr. Gore on Thursday, and afterward several remarked that it was not only too early to worry about the polls, but also that Mr. Bush will not seem such a fresh face in time.Molly Beth Malcolm, chairwoman of the Texas Democratic Party, likened the governor to a guy in college everyone wants to date but would never possibly get serious about. ''You know you'll have a good time,'' she told reporters, ''but he's not who anybody wants to marry.''PETER MARKS
Last Wednesday, at the MCI Sports Center in Washington, the Democratic Party raised an astonishing $26.5 million at a dinner headlined by President Clinton and Vice President Al Gore and attended by about 12,000 loyal Democrats, some paying a half-million dollars for the privilege. This staggering sum surpassed what until then had been the  record, the $21.3 million raised less than a month before by the Republicans and George W. Bush.The occasion cemented Mr. Clinton's legacy as the most persuasive and productive fund-raiser in American political history. Joe Lockhart, his press secretary, suggested that his boss might end up raising a cool billion before he is through. But it also dramatized something less deserving of awe, namely the complete domination of the campaign environment by soft money.Last Wednesday, at the MCI Sports Center in Washington, the Democratic Party raised an astonishing $26.5 million at a dinner headlined by President Clinton and Vice President Al Gore and attended by about 12,000 loyal Democrats, some paying a half-million dollars for the privilege. This staggering sum surpassed what until then had been the  record, the $21.3 million raised less than a month before by the Republicans and George W. Bush.The occasion cemented Mr. Clinton's legacy as the most persuasive and productive fund-raiser in American political history. Joe Lockhart, his press secretary, suggested that his boss might end up raising a cool billion before he is through. But it also dramatized something less deserving of awe, namely the complete domination of the campaign environment by soft money.At one time or another, Mr. Clinton and Mr. Gore have decried soft money. Even so, the soft money race proceeds at a torrid clip, without shame or remorse in either political party. As of last week, the two parties had raised at least $200 million in soft money, a record for this point in the election cycle, and they are well on their way to doubling the $260 million in soft money raised in 1996. Meanwhile, individual contributions are reaching nosebleed altitudes when some dinner guests fork over $500,000.Soft money has been making a mockery of the post-Watergate campaign finance laws ever since the parties began exploiting a loophole that permitted unlimited contributions to the political parties rather than individual candidates. But the new numbers are so outlandish that they numb the mind and threaten to dull the capacity for outrage. Yet this is the very same money that has purchased not only overnight stays in the Lincoln bedroom, but access to the Congressional offices where legislation affecting millions of people is written. The main difference now is that there is more of it.The collapse of the post-Watergate system has come about for several reasons. One is Janet Reno's political timidity and the failure of her Justice Department to investigate the fund-raising abuses of 1996 -- the illegal foreign money, the Lincoln bedroom money and all the rest of it. Another is the unwillingness of the Republican leadership in the Senate, notably Trent Lott, to allow a fair up-or-down vote on the broad ban on soft money sponsored by Senators John McCain and Russell Feingold. But why should he? A system that allows Mr. Lott and Republican big shots in the House like Tom DeLay to shake down contributors in exchange for influence rewards them every bit as much as it rewards the administration.A third reason is the spinelessness of the Federal Election Commission, the government's main enforcement agency. The commission has been as ineffectual as Ms. Reno in investigating abuses and imposing restraints on the parties. But Mr. Lott and others, with Bill Clinton's acquiescence, are determined to make it weaker still. Last week, the Senate confirmed a Republican named Bradley Smith for a seat on the commission despite Mr. Smith's sworn opposition to the very campaign finance laws he is supposed to enforce.His approval was part of a deal in which the Republicans agreed to unblock 16 of Mr. Clinton's judicial nominations. So just when the fund-raising system is spinning wildly out of control, the country is treated to a bipartisan sellout of the agency that is obliged under the law to regulate it.The polls say that the public wants reform, and in recent months dozens of corporations have decided to boycott what they see as little more than a shakedown operation. But for the most part the political leadership seems tone deaf. Mr. Bush would preserve the soft money loophole. At the Democratic gala, Mr. Gore said that the next dinner four years from now would not cost nearly as much because as president he would bring ''meaningful'' change. But neither he nor Mr. Clinton seemed the least bit embarrassed about dipping into the trough one more time.
THE cold war is over. There are no longer two superpowers poised to obliterate each other and the world, restrained only by the Strangelovian doctrine of MAD, or Mutually Assured Destruction. And yet the world still bristles with 30,000 or so nuclear arms, many on permanent high alert, while the ranks of nuclear powers keep growing.''During the cold war, these weapons were considered regrettable but necessary because of the Communists,'' said George R. Perkovich, an arms expert at the W. Alton Jones Foundation, a private group in Charlottesville, Va. ''Well, the Communists are gone, we won the cold war, but we still have the weapons.''THE cold war is over. There are no longer two superpowers poised to obliterate each other and the world, restrained only by the Strangelovian doctrine of MAD, or Mutually Assured Destruction. And yet the world still bristles with 30,000 or so nuclear arms, many on permanent high alert, while the ranks of nuclear powers keep growing.''During the cold war, these weapons were considered regrettable but necessary because of the Communists,'' said George R. Perkovich, an arms expert at the W. Alton Jones Foundation, a private group in Charlottesville, Va. ''Well, the Communists are gone, we won the cold war, but we still have the weapons.''It is a peculiar state of affairs, and a frightening one, and for the first time in years those whose business is arms control are trying to construct a better way to deal with the Pandora's Box of the nuclear age.''People have decided that traditional arms control is broken,'' said Stephen Hadley, a Pentagon official in the Bush administration and a campaign adviser to Gov. George W. Bush. ''We've been keeping a large inventory of nuclear weapons that we don't need and that the military doesn't want.''Centrist thinkers on both sides of the political aisle are calling for deep cuts in remaining arsenals, for building antimissile defenses against rogue states, and for getting serious about stopping the spread of missile technology and nuclear arms.Impatience with the status quo can be seen everywhere. President Clinton is moving toward approving a limited antimissile system, initially of 100 interceptors in Alaska. Next week in Moscow, he is to meet with Russian President Vladimir V. Putin about amending the 1972 Antiballistic Missile Treaty and making deep offensive cuts.Governor Bush said last week that as president he would reduce America's nuclear arsenal to its ''lowest possible number,'' perhaps unilaterally. ''Our mutual security need no longer depend on a nuclear balance of terror,'' he declared.Even the United Nations has bestirred itself. Last weekend, a conference to review the 1968 Non-Proliferation Treaty ended with the first-ever statement of ''unequivocal'' commitment from the United States and other nuclear powers to achieve comprehensive nuclear disarmament.Behind the shift -- besides sheer exasperation with decades of policy immobility -- lie significant changes in the strategic environment. Offensive weapons technology has spread far beyond the old nuclear club, and there has been steady progress in learning how to shoot down missiles from land, sea and space. These technological shifts will only gain in speed, and promise to fundamentally alter the field of play in the years and decades ahead.The new theoreticians, who have been talking informally in Washington for at least a year, also point to a depressing tally of arms control failures. ''The old paradigm has difficulties, many of them,'' said Jan M. Lodal, a former Pentagon official in the Clinton administration.Among the troubles he cites are stalled arms control negotiations between Moscow and Washington, the growing irrelevance of the nuclear test ban treaty, which was shaken in 1998 by Indian and Pakistani bomb tests and crippled last year when the Senate rejected it, and the developing threat of long-range missiles from North Korea, Iraq and Iran.Most of those arguing for new approaches to the nuclear dilemma aim to deprive the atom of its prestige and power, to make it clear that a state can be a player on the world stage without the bomb.''There's no longer this cataclysmic threat of a major war every day, so we have to put nuclear weapons into the background of international affairs,'' said Mr. Perkovich. To this end, the nuclear powers should drastically cut their arsenals and take arms off high alert, as Mr. Bush proposed last week. That would help curb atomic envy in India, Pakistan and Japan, said Mr. Perkovich, author of ''India's Nuclear Bomb'' (University of California, 1999).Deep cuts, he added, would make America less of a nuclear hypocrite in world eyes, bolstering its moral authority in fighting the spread of missile technology and nuclear arms and aiding the enforcement of all kinds of international rules and inspections.''Look at Iraq,'' Mr. Perkovich said. ''They're wavering on enforcement. To get that, you need international support.''Not everyone is happy about the new thinking. Old-school arms controllers say the new theorists have yet to explain how antimissile defenses would avoid stimulating new arms races and strategic insecurity, which could create conflict.''There may be something new here, because people are searching for an alternative to doing nothing, or doing the president's plan,'' said Joseph Cirincione, a senior associate at the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace. In his view, however, arms control is inseparable from the certainty that the first use of nuclear weapons would mean one's own destruction.  ''You can't cut the Gordian knot,'' he said.THAT is what makes antimissile arms the most contentious part of the new calculus. Even if affordable and feasible against rogue-state threats, missile defenses, paradoxically, are often seen as endangering the stability that comes with MAD (which is why the ABM treaty sought to scrap them).If mutual destruction did not seem assured, the major nuclear powers would base their war plans on overwhelming any shield with swarms of warheads, critics argue. So Russia would refuse to cut its arsenal further and China, which now has 20 or so warheads that can threaten the United States, might deploy hundreds of new ones, experts say. And that could set off chain reactions in India, Pakistan and Japan.''Deploying a national missile defense will surely crush hopes for the positive arms control steps,'' said John Isaacs, president of the Council for a Livable World, a Washington arms control group.Even more ominously, the rest of the world might view with alarm a United States protected by antimissile defenses, reasoning that it could fire a crippling first strike at an opponent's offensive weapons and use antimissile arms to protect itself against any weak retaliation. Analysts worry that the very existence of this possibility could, in times of crisis, trigger war.The new thinkers say such fears can be managed through intense strategic cooperation not just with allies, but with rivals and even foes. The keys are avoiding any surprises, relentlessly emphasizing benign intent and bringing others under the new-paradigm umbrella by sharing warning systems and possibly even antimissile arms. They point to East-West talks on defense sharing in the closing days of the cold war, and say new initiatives might be much broader, involving more nations.''The key question,'' said Michael Krepon, president of the Henry L. Stimson Center, a policy group in Washington at the center of the new strategic thinking,''is whether the impulse to build defenses destroys the prospect for a cooperative transition.'' If so, he said, ''you're stuck.''
Economists don't usually make good speculators, because they think too much. Like the famous if apocryphal professor who refused to pick up a $100 bill, they tend to assume that if there were money to be had, someone would already have taken it.However, caution that can be a liability on the trading floor is an asset off it. Sometimes the observant do spot opportunities for large, risk-free gain -- $100 bills lying in the street -- that others have somehow missed. But a wise man doesn't assume that such opportunities will present themselves on a regular basis, and he certainly doesn't use that assumption as a basis for his family budget -- or his plan to save Social Security.Economists don't usually make good speculators, because they think too much. Like the famous if apocryphal professor who refused to pick up a $100 bill, they tend to assume that if there were money to be had, someone would already have taken it.However, caution that can be a liability on the trading floor is an asset off it. Sometimes the observant do spot opportunities for large, risk-free gain -- $100 bills lying in the street -- that others have somehow missed. But a wise man doesn't assume that such opportunities will present themselves on a regular basis, and he certainly doesn't use that assumption as a basis for his family budget -- or his plan to save Social Security.It is a fact that historically stocks have been a very good investment. The best-known demonstration of that fact comes from Jeremy Siegel of the University of Pennsylvania, who has pointed out --in his book ''Stocks for the Long Run'' -- that during the 20th century anyone who was willing to buy and hold for long periods would almost always have done better buying stocks than bonds. So there wasn't a tradeoff between risk and return: stocks were just a better investment, period. It turns out that there was a $100 bill lying on the sidewalk (quite a few billion bills, actually) that for some reason nobody picked up.But many people have misunderstood what that observation means. It doesn't say that there is some natural law guaranteeing that stocks will always be a great investment; it says that historically stocks have been underpriced. Investors weren't willing to pay as much  for claims on corporate earnings  as they would have if they had properly understood how low the risks were.And a funny thing happened on the way to the 21st century: the price-earnings ratio -- the price of a dollar of corporate earnings -- soared. In the period studied by Professor Siegel prices were on average less than 15 times earnings, and stock investors on average earned a real return of 7 percent. Nowadays the price-earnings ratio is on average more like 30. Is this irrational exuberance, or did investors finally absorb Professor Siegel's lesson? Either way, that $100 bill has now been picked up. If stock investors now have to pay twice as much as they used to for a claim on earnings, and if profits grow in the future as they have in the past, those investors should now expect to earn only half the historical rate of return.And yet many of those offering plans to reform Social Security -- among them, of course, advisers to George W. Bush -- insist that stocks are the answer, and that it is safe to assume that stocks will keep on yielding 7 percent forever. And if you try to point out that buying a piece of corporate America is much more expensive than it used to be, they just repeat the mantra that stocks have historically been a great investment. In other words, that $100 bill was there yesterday, so it must still be there, right?Is the odd susceptibility of first-rate economists to such a naive fallacy a triumph of wishful thinking over analysis, or a disingenuous bow to political expediency? Recent remarks by Mr. Bush offer evidence of good old-fashioned American disingenuity at work.In a May 15 speech he asked his listeners to ''consider this simple fact: even if a worker chose only the safest investment in the world, an inflation-adjusted U.S. government bond, he or she would receive twice the rate of return of Social Security.'' That's an amazing fact; it's even more amazing when you realize that the Social Security system invests all its money in, you guessed it, U.S. government bonds. But the explanation -- which Mr. Bush's advisers understand very well, even if the governor does not -- is that today's workers are not only paying for their own retirement, but also supporting today's retirees. And if you think that's a minor detail -- that the question of how to meet existing obligations when workers are allowed to invest their contributions elsewhere is a side issue -- let me assure you that I too would have no trouble devising a painless plan to save Social Security, if you let me assume that a large part of the system's obligations would magically disappear.Or maybe ''magic'' isn't quite  the right word. How about ''voodoo''?RECKONINGS
Al Gore is desperate to get chicks.Married chicks. Single chicks. Old chicks. Young chicks. Anywhere a chick, chick?Al Gore is desperate to get chicks.Married chicks. Single chicks. Old chicks. Young chicks. Anywhere a chick, chick?If he doesn't stop turning off women, he'll never be president.Nothing seems to help. He got buff. He put on a pair of provocatively tight jeans. He shook his booty -- and even his Palm Pilot -- at a big fund-raiser. He's surrounded by female advisers. He throws all sorts of policy ideas to women. The guy practically lactates.Still, he's getting the brush. In the latest New York Times poll, George W. Bush has a wide lead with men and, amazingly, edges out Mr. Gore with women (who elected Bill Clinton), 44 to 42 percent. Even feminists are nagging Mr. Gore about his lack of oomph.Gore pollster Harrison Hickman went to Capitol Hill the other day to tell Democrats there was some good news: the campaign had conducted a focus group to ask women who would make a better date -- Al Gore or George W. Bush -- and Mr. Gore won.As The Wall Street Journal reported, Mr. Hickman said the women in the focus group found the vice president ''thoughtful, reflective and interested in what women have to say,'' while the Texas governor was seen as ''the type who would drive up in a flashy convertible, honk the horn instead of coming to the door, lean against his car chewing gum and spend all night talking about himself.''Mr. Gore, someone at the meeting told me, was viewed as ''the nicer guy, who would be more stable and reliable. Bush was seen as a guy who would dump you in a heartbeat.''The vice president's supporters were appalled that his campaign was wasting time and money on focus groups that looked at women's hormones rather than their brains.I personally am appalled that the Gore campaign equates going on a date with picking a president.Going on a date is really, really hard.And anyhow, I know someone who went on a blind date with Al Gore eons ago. ''It was a complete dud,'' my friend recalls. ''He didn't talk to me. He wasn't a conversationalist, in any sense of the word.''Of course, Mr. Gore has probably changed a lot. For one thing, he has learned to cover his imperfections.People magazine reported that he is using a pressurized makeup wand to spray a ''light mist'' of foundation on his face, an expensive accessory used by Hollywood actresses. After the spray was applied, the delighted candidate gushed to his makeup artist, ''I have never looked better.''Republicans mocked Alpha male for using a magic wand, but women might want to take it into account when they're choosing which candidate to date. It would be nice to have a guy who could share the secret of how to stop makeup from caking.I conducted my own focus group with girlfriends who know the candidates. This is how they weigh the pros and cons of an evening of Tennessee waltzing or Texas two-stepping.W. advantages: You could count on Tex-Mex with good guac, and putt-putt afterward. If the China trade bill comes up in conversation, Condi's just a phone call away. If you're mugged, an N.R.A. posse will gallop to the rescue.W. disadvantages: Aches and pains from a manic schedule of jogging, tennis, fishing and golfing. You could never go to his place. It would be a toxic-waste dump -- the only thing in the fridge, Gatorade and a jar of grape jelly. He'd pick you up in a Bonneville stuffed with old buddies and Bushes. He'd try to prove gravitas by casually jamming a copy of Lingua Franca into his jeans pocket.Al advantages: He'll pander to you and pick your favorite restaurant. He offers primo transportation, bulletproof limos and Air Force Two. If the date isn't going well, he'll call a facilitator. He'll amuse you with wild exaggerations about his accomplishments.Al disadvantages: He'd talk to your parents too earnestly for too long. He'd take you to a revival house to see ''The Sorrow and the Pity.'' He'd bring his global warming charts and talk about his Inner Ecology. You'd have to be prepared for the date to become a fund-raiser. (Al would soften the blow by calling it a ''non-finance-related, community outreach event.'') If the date was going really well, he might shout and growl, the way he does when he gets excited at labor rallies and black churches. Afterward, he might force you to do a focus group to analyze how the night went.
Of all the things he is being called lately by his critics, ''liberal'' and ''dove'' make Gov. Tom Ridge laugh out loud.''I'll bet the only combat ever seen by the guy who wrote that has been in front of a Nintendo machine,'' said Mr. Ridge, his credentials as a Bronze Star combat veteran of Vietnam unsullied by the slings and arrows now pelting him from within his own Republican Party.Of all the things he is being called lately by his critics, ''liberal'' and ''dove'' make Gov. Tom Ridge laugh out loud.''I'll bet the only combat ever seen by the guy who wrote that has been in front of a Nintendo machine,'' said Mr. Ridge, his credentials as a Bronze Star combat veteran of Vietnam unsullied by the slings and arrows now pelting him from within his own Republican Party.The Vietnam-fighting experience of the husky, 55-year-old Pennsylvania governor comes in handy these days. He is being targeted by the social conservative right for being a Roman Catholic who unapologetically favors a woman's right to choose abortion, yet remains prominently featured on a list of potential running mates of Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, the putative Republican presidential nominee.''The governor says there is no litmus test, and I believe him,'' Mr. Ridge said, referring to the simmering abortion issue.But social and religious conservatives see things differently, and have issued stern warnings to Mr. Bush of dire consequences in November if he picks someone like Mr. Ridge.''The base in the Republican Party is pro-life,'' James C. Dobson, the conservative religious leader, said on Wednesday. ''You can't win without that base.''Governor Ridge, his abortion rights stand firmly defying party platform dogma, remains the most mentioned prospective running mate. He set a Republican record for this heavily Democratic state with a 780,000-vote victory margin in his 1998 re-election. A Bush-Ridge ticket might well deliver this critical battleground, the fifth-largest state in electoral votes, to the Republicans.In two elections, Mr. Ridge has shown considerable crossover attraction among Democratic voters. He has the power to garner up to 30 percent of them, according to polls -- a factor that Mr. Bush must weigh as he charts a centrist strategy.Other Republicans also note that Mr. Bush had to be more sensitive to the nation's large Catholic vote after his controversial speech in the South Carolina primary at Bob Jones University, a campus that critics denounce as anti-Catholic.And while Mr. Ridge's support of abortion rights might signal a harsh party split for some Republicans, others say his candidacy as vice president would draw more women to the Republican ticket.''All this wonderful speculation,'' remarked Governor Ridge, his smile broad but fatalistic as he noted that the decision on a running mate was entirely Mr. Bush's to make after a long process involving ''a lot of other people,'' in the Texas governor's words.''What if? What if?'' asked Mr. Ridge, happily teasing himself as much as his boosters and critics. He seems to be enjoying the freedom of having no say in the matter as he looks forward to being the state host at the Republican National Convention in Philadelphia this summer.But as the vice-presidential question is debated, conservative critics in National Review and other publications, nettled by his support of abortion rights, are busily vetting Mr. Ridge's 12-year record in Congress to argue that, even beyond the abortion issue, he is not an authentic conservative.''Protectionist,'' another charge made against Mr. Ridge, brings more open laughter here in the executive chamber of the governor, who noted that he was a card-carrying member of the hod-carriers union when he was a college student who worked in construction during the summers.''I voted for Nafta, in Congress,'' Mr. Ridge said, bemused at what he was reading lately from conservative polemicists.''I mean, this gets comical,'' he continued. He repeatedly used the word ''conservative'' to characterize himself in an interview.Only the November election, he said, with all the variables brought to the voters by the candidates and their campaigns, might settle the question of whether the Republican Party is ready for an abortion rights candidate on the ticket beside the anti-abortion Mr. Bush.''I think the decibel level may be going down a little bit on this issue,'' said Mr. Ridge, whose political career in Pennsylvania has not measurably suffered from his support of abortion rights, even after his being obliquely criticized by his bishop.''But I don't think we're done with the very important struggle we're having within the party as to how to deal with it,'' he continued. ''Certainly, my friend Governor Bush disagrees with me, and a majority of the delegates at the convention probably disagree with me.''Obviously, we're not going to change the platform. But it's interesting to note there are some people in the party who, instead of defeating Al Gore, would suggest that if the No. 2, whether me or somebody else, doesn't share their belief on abortion, they might abandon the party.''One quarter where Governor Ridge is bolstered in his insistence that he is a true-blue conservative is across the Statehouse, within the Democratic minority.''Tom Ridge is a perfect fit for George Bush,'' said State Senator Christine M. Tartaglione, speaking in her role as the state Democratic chairwoman.''His actions speak louder than his words,'' Ms. Tartaglione said, contending that Mr. Ridge, in the state's recent tax cuts of more than $1 billion, favored big business interests at the expense of needy families.''We all wait for Tom Ridge's leadership,'' she said scornfully.The governor's supporters quickly cite a raft of new social welfare and education laws to argue that he is the very model of the ''compassionate conservative'' that Mr. Bush has proclaimed as the cornerstone of his campaign.And Mr. Ridge has just the sort of paradoxical touches in his resume that politicians dream of.His parents were postwar strivers; his father, a Navy veteran, worked two jobs to finance his children's parochial school tuition. Up from public housing, the family bought a modest house in Erie, Pa., that is still home to the governor's mother.''My DNA is a little confused,'' Mr. Ridge said lightly in noting that his father was a fervid blue-collar Democrat while his mother was a no less fervid Republican ward worker. The family dinner table was a forum that respected politics, he said.He graduated from Harvard after winning a needs-based scholarship and, while studying at Dickinson Law School in Pennsylvania was drafted into the Army and served in the infantry.''I don't dwell on Vietnam; I draw on it,'' said Mr. Ridge who, with a similar margin of removal, recalls the feverish antiwar protests at Harvard as a fascinating backdrop that did not draw him away from his studies.As the attacks by social conservatives heighten, the governor does not hesitate to defend his view on abortion rights.''This is a difficult personal decision that has enormous emotional, psychological, intensely physical and oftentimes religious dimensions to it,'' he said. ''This is a tough decision for people to make. One of the things I talk about is trust.''It comes down to whether I would place ultimate responsibility in that very difficult personal decision, with so many dimensions to it, in the hands of government -- I mean, some of the people in my party would criminalize it! -- or leave it up to the individual, leave it up to the woman.''For all the intramural sniping, the old combat sergeant admits he enjoys the extra political notice and power that seems to come with the vice-presidential speculation, however fruitless it may prove.''It's the what-if factor,'' Mr. Ridge said, describing a state of ''irrational exuberance'' that he is experiencing.''It's a heck of a ride,'' the governor added. ''I've already got a great job, and I'm going to help my old friend George Bush get elected president. And you know? I think he can carry Pennsylvania without me.''
Following are excerpts from the prepared text of a speech about national security that Vice President Al Gore delivered yesterday at the United States Military Academy at West Point.We have made dramatic progress in reducing the number of nuclear weapons. In the last decade, the United States and the countries of the former Soviet Union together have taken about eight to nine thousand strategic nuclear weapons out of commission.Following are excerpts from the prepared text of a speech about national security that Vice President Al Gore delivered yesterday at the United States Military Academy at West Point.We have made dramatic progress in reducing the number of nuclear weapons. In the last decade, the United States and the countries of the former Soviet Union together have taken about eight to nine thousand strategic nuclear weapons out of commission.We need to continue on a course of deeper reductions. But it is critical that we have the right approach in doing so.We are urging the Russians to tighten cooperation with us to protect nuclear weapons materials and stop the transfer of ballistic missile and nuclear weapons technologies to rogue states. It is these states that represent the emerging threat to our country.The administration has been working on the technology for a national missile defense system designed to protect all 50 states from a limited attack at the hands of a rogue state. We believe, however, that it is essential to do this in a way that does not destroy the Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty. The ABM Treaty is the cornerstone of strategic stability in our relationship with Russia.It prevents either the Russians or ourselves from deploying defenses powerful enough -- assuming anyone can solve the engineering problems -- to neutralize the deterrent of either side. The Russians have made clear that their response to a powerful U.S. defensive system would be to halt arms control and increase the numbers of their offensive nuclear weapons. Thus, the ABM Treaty is a prerequisite for the deeper reductions in nuclear arms that we are seeking in START III, which is under discussion with the Russians even as we speak.We and the Russians agreed in Helsinki in 1997 that Start III would involve reductions to totals in the range of 2,000 to 2,500 weapons. That is a cut of up to 1,000 weapons from Start II levels. Such reductions are possible only through careful negotiation. . . .An approach that combines serious unilateral reductions with an attempt to build a massive defensive system will create instability, and thus undermine our security. Nuclear unilateralism will hinder, rather than help, arms control.Strategic stability can never be a one-way street. It either exists for both the United States and Russia, or neither. Reductions alone do not guarantee stability. It is how reductions are made and how they interact with defensive systems that makes the difference. That is why arms control and strategic modernization have to be built upon planned and negotiated agreements.The national missile defense system that the president will review this summer is intended to meet threats from proliferant states like North Korea while preserving strategic stability. It can co-exist with the ABM Treaty, if that treaty is adjusted. It can be compatible with further arms reductions.
The American labor movement is badly divided on political strategy after last week's vote in favor of the China trade bill, which labor opposed. And some union leaders and Democratic consultants say this split could set back Vice President Al Gore's electoral chances as well as Democratic hopes of regaining control of the House of Representatives.Angry about the trade bill, two of the nation's most powerful unions -- the Teamsters and the United Automobile Workers -- are showing little inclination to embrace Mr. Gore, who backed the bill, and have threatened to cancel endorsements of several House Democrats who voted for it.The American labor movement is badly divided on political strategy after last week's vote in favor of the China trade bill, which labor opposed. And some union leaders and Democratic consultants say this split could set back Vice President Al Gore's electoral chances as well as Democratic hopes of regaining control of the House of Representatives.Angry about the trade bill, two of the nation's most powerful unions -- the Teamsters and the United Automobile Workers -- are showing little inclination to embrace Mr. Gore, who backed the bill, and have threatened to cancel endorsements of several House Democrats who voted for it.But John J. Sweeney, the A.F.L.-C.I.O.'s president, is pushing the labor federation's 68 member unions to line up behind Mr. Gore and House Democrats in general to increase their prospects in November.Nonetheless, Mr. Sweeney acknowledged that many of the labor federation's 13 million members may be so upset about the China bill that they will sit out the November elections, a development that could hurt Mr. Gore worst in the industrial swing states of the Midwest.Referring to the trade fight, Richard Trumka, the A.F.L.-C.I.O.'s secretary-treasurer, said, ''It's going to make a difficult job more difficult.''David E. Bonior of Michigan, the House Democratic whip who has repeatedly said the trade battle could hurt his party's chances, has consulted with labor leaders in recent days to try to rally union support behind the Democrats, who need to pick up six seats to regain control of the House.On Wednesday, the House voted 237 to 197 in favor of granting permanent normal trade relations to China, with labor lobbying fervently against the bill and business and President Clinton backing it. Seventy-three Democrats voted in favor.Union leaders said they opposed the bill because of violations of human rights in China and because they feared the legislation would encourage American companies to move factories and jobs to China.James P. Hoffa, the Teamsters' president, and Stephen Yokich, the U.A.W.'s president, said last week that Mr. Gore's support of the trade bill made it less likely that their unions would endorse him. Mr. Yokich has even suggested his union might endorse Ralph Nader, a prospect some political experts call unlikely.For all the complaining within the  labor movement about the Democrats, many union leaders say that labor does not have many options in November because most Republicans supported the trade bill. And when the dust settles, many labor leaders say, most of labor will back Democratic candidates because they back unions on many issues far more than Republicans do.Saying their members felt betrayed, the Teamsters have canceled their endorsement of Lois Capps, a California Democrat who supported the trade bill. She won in 1998 with 55 percent of the vote, helped by heavy labor campaigning on her behalf. The Teamsters and Auto Workers also said they would withdraw their endorsement of another Democrat who backed the bill, Sander M. Levin of Michigan, who is considered to have a safe seat. The Steelworkers union is also reassessing support of several House Democrats.''There will definitely be some districts where we go after some people who voted wrong,'' said Michael Mathis, the Teamsters' political director.The Teamsters have also warned that they might cancel endorsements of three other House Democrats: Tom Sawyer of Ohio, Diana DeGette of Colorado and Dennis Moore of Kansas. Although Mr. Moore represents a rural area, labor unions  played a major role in bringing him a narrow victory in 1998 after they saw a seat the Democrats could pick up.Many Teamster officials voiced little concern that their strategy might jeopardize the Democrats' prospects. Teamster leaders said labor should not reward Democrats who backed the trade bill even if the Republicans running in those districts are less friendly to labor.In contrast, Mr. Sweeney is pushing unions to back Mr. Gore and most Democratic House candidates because in his view they are more likely to back labor on issues like Social Security and the minimum wage than are the Republicans.Labor leaders say rank-and-file anger over the passage of the North American Free Trade Agreement in 1993 was a major reason the Democrats lost control of the House in 1994. Some labor leaders say dismay over the China fight could similarly help the Republicans this November.''There are many union members for whom this is a really, really serious and intense personal issue,'' said David Axelrod, a Democratic consultant. ''These are some of the same people the Democrats will be relying on in some swing districts and in some swing states. There is a concern that some union members will walk away in frustration over this.''If the trade fight had any silver lining for the Democrats, it was that the support for the bill shown by President Clinton and 73 House Democrats could win them contributions from corporations that favor normal trade relations with China. Since early 1999, according to the Center for Responsive Politics, business has made $520 million in soft money and political action committee contributions to both parties, while labor unions have contributed $35 million.David J. Leland, chairman of the Ohio Democratic Party, predicted that the China battle would not hurt his party this fall. ''Obviously members of labor disagree with the vice president and some members of Congress on this,'' he said. ''But over all, these union members understand that working families are better served by making sure that Al Gore is the next president.''Representatives Capps and Levin said they hoped to minimize any loss of labor support by continuing to work closely with unions.''I know the people who beseeched me not to support the bill would be upset if I did,'' Ms. Capps said, acknowledging that her seat was vulnerable, even before the Teamsters withdrew support. ''I have a strong record on issues important to working families, like the patient's bill of rights and safety and health at the workplace.''
Vice President Al Gore, speaking today at the United States Military Academy, criticized Gov. George W. Bush's support for a national missile defense system along with a possible one-sided reduction in American nuclear warheads.''An approach that combines serious unilateral reductions with an attempt to build a massive defensive system will create instability and thus undermine our security,'' Mr. Gore told the West Point graduates in a sun-splashed ceremony at the academy's Michie Stadium.Vice President Al Gore, speaking today at the United States Military Academy, criticized Gov. George W. Bush's support for a national missile defense system along with a possible one-sided reduction in American nuclear warheads.''An approach that combines serious unilateral reductions with an attempt to build a massive defensive system will create instability and thus undermine our security,'' Mr. Gore told the West Point graduates in a sun-splashed ceremony at the academy's Michie Stadium.''Nuclear unilateralism will hinder, rather than help, arms control,'' Mr. Gore said, before handing out diplomas to the 944 graduates who trooped across the stage in their dress uniforms and white gloves.Without mentioning Mr. Bush by name, Mr. Gore issued the most detailed rebuttal yet of the foreign policy address that Mr. Bush delivered in Washington on Tuesday. Again and again, Mr. Gore assailed the notion of one-sided arms reductions, a prospect that Mr. Bush had raised at an appearance with a cast of well-known Republican foreign policy leaders.Mr. Gore emphasized that reductions should be pursued within negotiations and the framework of existing arms control treaties.The vice president said that the Clinton administration was already negotiating for bilateral cuts in nuclear arms and was considering a limited missile defense, but said the kind of approach recommended by Mr. Bush was misguided.''Reductions alone do not guarantee stability,'' Mr. Gore said. ''It is how reductions are made and how they interact with defensive systems that makes the difference.''Mr. Gore, who became a specialist in arms control after he was elected to Congress in the mid-1970's, said: ''Reductions have to be carried out in a way that reduces the risk of confrontation. If you're not careful, you could have a reduction of missiles and a more dangerous world.''Mr. Gore's remarks were unmistakably pointed in criticism of the Bush speech, which called for a reduction -- possibly unilateral -- in American nuclear weapons combined with an expanded missile defense system.Mr. Bush has said he would pull out of the 1972 Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty if the Russians did not agree to adjust it after ''a reasonable amount of time.''Mr. Gore was invited to the academy in his capacity as vice president, and the speech was billed as an official vice presidential event, not a campaign appearance. As such, he told reporters on Friday night, his remarks on the academy grounds would not be ''political'' in nature. ''I will not make a partisan remark,'' he said.But his comments today were Mr. Gore's first in public since Mr. Bush made his proposal on Tuesday, and they were being written by the vice president and his longtime national security adviser, Leon Fuerth, as the vice presidential entourage flew to the Hudson Valley on Friday night aboard Air Force Two from a campaign appearance in Memphis.After today's speech, Mr. Fuerth and Louis Caldera, the secretary of the Army, who is a political appointee of the president, asserted that Mr. Gore's remarks today had not been political.Mr. Fuerth told reporters that the vice president's comments were based on his long-standing principles and the fact that President Clinton was going to Russia next week, and that they were not intended as a response to Mr. Bush.''Everything he said about strategic stability and so on came straight out of things that he was writing and talking about in the House of Representatives and as a Senator when he first began to enter the field of arms control, and it is mainly triggered by the fact that the president is about to leave for Moscow in a matter of a few days to engage in exactly this set of issues,'' Mr. Fuerth told reporters after today's speech.''The speech is not political, the speech is policy-based,'' Mr. Fuerth said. ''The ideas that the vice president presented have been in his record for a very long time.''Similarly, Mr. Caldera, asked if the remarks did not violate West Point's policy of barring political speeches, said: ''Absolutely not. I think there was great care taken to make sure that this was not a political speech.''In Mr. Gore's discussion with reporters on Friday night on Air Force Two, he sharply criticized Mr. Bush's proposal. He said it would re-ignite the arms race, and by saying so, he seemed to ensure that his differences with Mr. Bush would be part of the news media's coverage today.Today, at the graduation exercise, Mr. Gore outlined the Clinton administration's efforts toward creating a national missile defense system that would protect all 50 states from a limited attack.''We believe, however, that it is essential to do this in a way that does not destroy the Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty,'' Mr. Gore said. ''The A.B.M. Treaty is the cornerstone of strategic stability in our relationship with Russia.''What Mr. Bush proposed would almost surely entail violating the A.B.M. Treaty of 1972.The Texas governor proposed measures that would include building a defensive system that would cover all 50 states and could be extended to protect allies in Europe, the Middle East and Asia. In addition to holding out the possibility of large unilateral arms cuts, he said most American nuclear weapons should be removed from hair-trigger alert status.Mr. Bush said he wanted to reduce the size of the United States' nuclear arsenal to the ''lowest possible number consistent with our national security'' and below the levels called for under the Start II accord with Russia.Mr. Gore also noted in his speech to the cadets that President Clinton was headed for Moscow next week. ''This is an historic meeting,'' he said. ''The president should leave with the full support of the American people,'' a subtle reminder to Republicans that partisan differences over national security traditionally stop at the water's edge when the president travels abroad.Mr. Bush's speech on military preparedness, delivered in Washington as he was flanked by foreign policy experts from four Republican administrations, earned the governor widespread news media coverage on a topic on which the Gore campaign has hoped Mr. Bush would appear inexperienced and politically vulnerable.Gore advisers have believed that the vice president's expertise in international affairs, and particularly arms control, would give him an edge in November.While Democrats had expected Mr. Bush to try to bolster his foreign policy credentials in the campaign, few expected the kind of speech that Mr. Bush delivered on Tuesday.The speech was hailed by some foreign policy experts as a ''breakthrough'' in Republican thinking -- particularly the unilateral reduction of warheads -- and seemed to put arms control squarely on the debate agenda for the presidential campaign.The graduation ceremony at West Point, one of the most prestigious forums in the nation's military culture, offers an almost irresistible platform for anyone who wants to influence the national debate. But for just that reason, the military academy limits its speakers who are officeholders to the president, the vice president and the speaker of the House and bars political activities by them, according to Maj. James Whaley, a West Point spokesman.
INTERNATIONAL3-12Building Missile Defense May Start Arms Race  American intelligence officials are warning that building a limited national missile defense could set off a cold-war-style arms race between China, India and Pakistan, administration officials say, as President Clinton nears a decision on whether to build such a system.1INTERNATIONAL3-12Building Missile Defense May Start Arms Race  American intelligence officials are warning that building a limited national missile defense could set off a cold-war-style arms race between China, India and Pakistan, administration officials say, as President Clinton nears a decision on whether to build such a system.1Ulster Set for Local Rule  Northern Ireland's largest Protestant party voted by a narrow margin to return to a power-sharing administration with their Catholic rivals in Sinn Fein, the political representatives of the Irish Republican Army, meaning that governing of the province will shift to Belfast in days.1Iran's New Parliament Opens  Iran's new reformer-dominated parliament opened in Tehran, the first since the Islamic revolution to include a majority of members who appear eager and ready to challenge the conservative clergy's control.8Presidential Debate in Mexico  In a televised debate with two rivals, Vicente Fox Quesada, the leading opposition presidential candidate in Mexico, gave a vigorous performance that helped him recover from embarrassing mistakes last week.12Low Turnout at Belgrade Rally  About 10,000 people attended an anti-government rally, a relatively low turnout reflecting popular disappointment with the leaders of the political opposition.6NATIONAL14-26Gore Faults Bush Plan On Arms Cuts and Defense  Vice President Al Gore, speaking at the United States Military Academy, criticized Gov. George W. Bush's support for a national missile defense system along with a possible one-sided reduction in American nuclear warheads.1Where Beauty Reigns Supreme  South Beach, the southernmost tip of the city of Miami Beach, is utterly absorbed by beauty, peopled with fashion models and dreamers and others who just like moving about a place where bartenders pose like Grecian statues and cafe hostesses are achingly lovely.1Bennington College in Turmoil  Bennington College is once again in turmoil with dissident and dismissed faculty members casting Dr. Elizabeth Coleman, the president, as a dictatorial figure who crushes any criticism. Two trustees have resigned.14Labor Split by China Trade Vote  The labor movement is badly divided on political strategy after last week's vote in favor of the China trade bill, which labor opposed. Some union leaders and Democratic consultants say this split could set back the party's electoral chances.22Drivers Pay Record Gas Prices  Gasoline prices have soared to the highest levels of the year in many parts of the nation, after falling a good bit in the wake of a decision by the petroleum-exporting countries in March to increase oil production.24NEW YORK/REGION27-32Giuliani Departure Changes Assumptions in Senate Race  The New York Senate race has been transformed from a battle over a few undecided voters into a broad and complex contest. Voting blocs and geographical preferences that had seemed fixed are suddenly up for grabs after Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's departure, strategists say.1New Rent Rules Contested  There is a new battlefront between tenants and landlords: 200 pages of legalese drafted by New York State officials to rewrite the rent regulations that cover 2.4 million residents, most of them in New York City.30Fear of Crime Remains Low  Despite a number of recent ghoulish crimes making the news in New York, it is difficult to catch many people -- especially affluent people -- in the act of worrying about the return of crime to where they live.27Fresh Air Fund28OBITUARIES33-34Rocket Richard  The charismatic star of the Montreal Canadiens through the 1940's and 1950's, one of the most electrifying goal-scorers in National Hockey League history and a revered figure in French-speaking Canada, he was 78.34Frank G. Wangeman  A mentor to a generation of hotel managers, he was 88.33Chess33Weather35Cong. Vote23
As President Clinton nears a decision on whether to build a limited national missile defense, American intelligence officials are warning that such a system could set off a cold-war-style arms race between China, India and Pakistan, administration officials say.While the American officials have repeatedly said an antimissile defense is not aimed at Beijing, even they acknowledge that the system being designed could significantly undercut or even neutralize China's small nuclear force.As President Clinton nears a decision on whether to build a limited national missile defense, American intelligence officials are warning that such a system could set off a cold-war-style arms race between China, India and Pakistan, administration officials say.While the American officials have repeatedly said an antimissile defense is not aimed at Beijing, even they acknowledge that the system being designed could significantly undercut or even neutralize China's small nuclear force.That could lead China to add to its nuclear arsenal. And if China built up its force, its regional rival India could do the same, as could India's rival Pakistan, heightening tensions along the world's newest nuclear frontier.Such a scenario, which officials are expected to outline for Mr. Clinton in an official intelligence estimate due in June, has raised questions about the administration's own efforts to try to slow the spread of nuclear weapons and the ballistic missiles needed to launch them.''If China increases the number of missiles it has, would India think it has to increase its missiles?'' said a senior United States official familiar with the analysis being prepared. ''And if India increases its missiles, then Pakistan does.''President Clinton has said he plans to decide later this year whether to proceed with a missile defense based on four criteria: the missile threat, technological viability of the program, the effect on arms control and cost. The response from China and Russia is an important factor in Mr. Clinton's decision.While newly disclosed defense documents indicate that the Pentagon was researching ways in the mid-1990's to counter a limited Chinese missile attack, defense officials say that is no longer the American policy. The system under consideration, they insist, is intended to counter relatively small, unsophisticated missile threats from countries like North Korea, Iran and Iraq.Samuel R. Berger, President Clinton's national security adviser, says Beijing's concerns may be eased not only by reassurances about the intent of the system but by general progress in economic and political relations.''There are other dimensions to the relationship with the Chinese that are of far more long-term importance than national missile defense,'' Mr. Berger said in an interview.The administration has expended enormous diplomatic energy -- unsuccessfully so far -- trying to persuade the Russians that a missile defense system would not threaten its much larger strategic forces. It has made even less headway with the Chinese.There are several reasons why. Unlike Russia, which still maintains a force of more than 5,000 warheads from the cold war, China has deployed a minimal nuclear force, primarily 18 single-warhead land-based CSS-4 missiles.The argument that the Clinton administration has used with the Russians -- that a limited missile defense is not a threat because it could be easily swamped by an overwhelming Russian missile attack -- does not apply to the Chinese.China's old liquid-fueled CSS-4 missiles are kept on low alert with the warheads stored separately from the missiles. China also has 12 missiles on a submarine that rarely strays far from its port, from which it cannot reach the United States. And China seems convinced that the system would come closer to neutralizing its current nuclear force than has been publicly acknowledged.''We don't deny to the Chinese that the system has some capability against Chinese missiles, but that is not what it is designed to do,'' said the under secretary of defense for policy, Walter B. Slocombe, said in an interview.Another factor is China's apprehensions about the future course of relations with Washington.American defense officials make plans according to a rival's perceived capabilities, not its intent. The Chinese make the same point, and complain that despite the assurances of the Clinton administration, they cannot be certain that a future administration would not use a missile defense against it, especially since China has often been cast as a threat by conservative Republicans.A Clinton administration official said: ''The Chinese tell us, 'You may not be directing the system against us, but what about the next guy? How can we be confident that the next administration may not have a different policy? It could use the system against us, just as it does against North Korea.' ''The Chinese also fear that the United States could adjust and expand a limited defense, which in its first phase will consist of a battle-management radar site in Alaska and 100 interceptors. And George W. Bush, the Republican candidate, has said the United States would develop a far more ambitious defensive system if he is elected president.Another reason for the Chinese suspicions is that the Pentagon has previously worked on defensive systems to counter the Chinese arsenal.During the Bush administration, the Pentagon instructed the TRW Corporation, an American military contractor, to develop ground-based interceptors that would stop ''limited attacks by China'' using CSS-4 missiles, according to a 1993 document prepared by the United States Army.The Pentagon insists that countering China is no longer a goal, and its Ballistic Missile Defense Organization declined to say whether it is still studying ways to intercept Chinese warheads.But defense officials acknowledge that the planning documents are constantly updated with the latest science and intelligence estimates of ballistic missiles.Beyond a direct threat from China, there are other reasons why the Pentagon might want to develop the means to thwart its missile systems. American intelligence officials cautioned in a 1999 analysis that Russia and China might sell countermeasures like decoy warheads to developing nations the United States wants to defend against.The Pentagon's missile-defense organization has also acknowledged that the new American defense would have the ''residual capability'' to defend against the ''unauthorized launch by an established nuclear power of a few missiles with simple countermeasures,'' a definition that includes the Chinese.''The system has to be able to respond to more than just North Korea,'' a defense industry official said.Seeking to ease China's concerns, the Clinton administration has argued that while an antimissile system may be effective against China's current arsenal, it would be less so against the updated arsenal China has long planned to build.Even before the Clinton administration began seriously considering antimissile defenses, the Chinese were planning to deploy a solid-fueled land-based missile of intercontinental range that could be moved around on a truck, as well as a new submarine-launched missile.American intelligence officials project that the Chinese will have  ''several tens'' of new and old missiles that can reach the United States by 2015 under Beijing's current modernization plan.A missile defense, then, would have little effect on the Chinese strategic modernization, Pentagon officials assert. China, they add, is more anxious about the provision of antimissile technology to Taiwan than it is about a defense to protect the United States.Despite these arguments, however, Pentagon officials acknowledge that they know very little about the missiles, warheads and countermeasures the Chinese plan to deploy.''We assume the Chinese plan to modernize their force,'' a senior Pentagon official said. ''It's impossible to say how much it would be affected by a national missile defense of the kind we're talking about.''Some senior intelligence experts nonetheless believe that a missile defense will prompt the Chinese to build up their strategic force beyond what they had previously planned, in order to ensure that it remains viable.Such a response by China would be consistent with orthodox arms control theory, which holds that the construction of a missile defense prompts an adversary to build more missiles in the hope that at least some can get through the defense.The American intelligence community's assessment will be contained in a new official intelligence report on the responses of foreign governments to a United States missile defense. The White House asked in December that the report be prepared so that Mr. Clinton could consider it in making his decision on a missile defense. Officials caution that the estimate is still being prepared.''We would expect them to continue and perhaps even enhance countermeasures,'' a senior United States official said. ''We have projected that they will have several tens of missiles by 2015. National Missile Defense might prompt them to do more than that.''''That would be likely,'' the senior official added.One way for the Chinese to extend their build-up would be to add new warheads to their old 18 CSS-4, transforming them from single-warhead missiles into four-warhead missiles. They might also double the size of their projected land-based mobile missiles.As a result, the Chinese could have more than 100 warheads by 2015, which is more than the 100 interceptors the United States plans to deploy in the first phase of its missile defense. The Chinese, the administration official said, might even deploy more than 200 warheads if the United States continues to expand its missile shield.China's expanded force of nuclear-tipped long-range missiles might not be directed at India, they say. But it would be a capability that the Indians could not ignore, and as a result India might build up the short-range missiles it used to defend against China.Administration officials are divided over whether India would respond in such a way, but the emerging analysis has dramatically raised the stakes.Seeking to balance its concerns over stability in South Asia with its interest in missile defense, the Clinton administration is likely to redouble its negotiating efforts with the Chinese and perhaps even explore new forms of arms control with Beijing. By all accounts, however, Washington has a difficult job ahead.''The basic point we have made is that a missile system is not aimed at them, that we are comfortable with deterrent relationship with China,'' a senior Clinton administration official said. ''But we have not been able to overcome their suspicions.''
To the Editor:Re ''A Philosophy With Roots in Conservative Texas Soil'' (front page, May 21): The environment that produced George W. Bush, the self-proclaimed ''most anti-abortion governor in the country,'' also shaped the views of the president of Planned Parenthood.I, too, was a child of 1950's West Texas. After high school near Midland, I went as a young bride to Odessa and spent 20 years in the same ''oil patch'' that your article calls the ''real America.'' Life options for women there were minimal.  No one talked to youth about sexuality or birth control. But we knew about illegal abortions and about women who died from them. I had three children by age 21.To the Editor:Re ''A Philosophy With Roots in Conservative Texas Soil'' (front page, May 21): The environment that produced George W. Bush, the self-proclaimed ''most anti-abortion governor in the country,'' also shaped the views of the president of Planned Parenthood.I, too, was a child of 1950's West Texas. After high school near Midland, I went as a young bride to Odessa and spent 20 years in the same ''oil patch'' that your article calls the ''real America.'' Life options for women there were minimal.  No one talked to youth about sexuality or birth control. But we knew about illegal abortions and about women who died from them. I had three children by age 21.West Texas was a catalyst for my lifetime of advocacy for reproductive health and rights. Conversely, Mr. Bush's presidential agenda would take women back to the 1950's.GLORIA FELDT  President  Planned Parenthood Action Fund  New York, May 23, 2000
To the Editor:In your May 21 front-page article about George W. Bush's youth, John Bizilo, Mr. Bush's elementary school principal, gives a nostalgic account of paddling the young George. The article leaves the impression that paddling last occurred in the 1950's.According to the Department of Education, 118,701 children were paddled in Texas public schools in the 1996-97 school year (the last year for which data are available). Children who are paddled are often left with visible bruises and emotional trauma. This cruel form of child abuse has now been banned in most of the civilized world.To the Editor:In your May 21 front-page article about George W. Bush's youth, John Bizilo, Mr. Bush's elementary school principal, gives a nostalgic account of paddling the young George. The article leaves the impression that paddling last occurred in the 1950's.According to the Department of Education, 118,701 children were paddled in Texas public schools in the 1996-97 school year (the last year for which data are available). Children who are paddled are often left with visible bruises and emotional trauma. This cruel form of child abuse has now been banned in most of the civilized world.The fact that George W. Bush governs a state in which schoolchildren are still beaten every day is something that voters should be aware of.JOHN GUTHROW  New York, May 21, 2000
To the Editor:Your May 22 front-page article ''A Boy's Life In and Out of the Family Script'' reassured me about Vice President Al Gore's character. His mother and father may have been ambitious up-from-nothing parents, but it's where you finish, rather than where you start, that matters. Is there anything more American than wanting a better life for your children?To the Editor:Your May 22 front-page article ''A Boy's Life In and Out of the Family Script'' reassured me about Vice President Al Gore's character. His mother and father may have been ambitious up-from-nothing parents, but it's where you finish, rather than where you start, that matters. Is there anything more American than wanting a better life for your children?Ideally, all of our parents teach us formality and dignity, and if we're lucky we know the appropriate time to invoke them. It's reassuring to know that Vice President Gore's childhood included pranks. It sounds as if he spent his formative years in the same way many of us did: trying to remain a child while meeting the expectations of our parents.STEVE A. LUDSIN  East Hampton, N.Y., May 22, 2000
Secretary of Defense William S. Cohen today invited Gov. George W. Bush of Texas and his national security advisers to the Pentagon for a briefing on the state of the nation's strategic nuclear arsenal after criticizing Mr. Bush's recent pledge to reduce the number of American nuclear warheads.Mr. Bush's campaign aides responded by pointing to the military credentials of his advisers and suggesting that the campaign of Vice President Al Gore was playing politics with the Joint Chiefs of Staff.Secretary of Defense William S. Cohen today invited Gov. George W. Bush of Texas and his national security advisers to the Pentagon for a briefing on the state of the nation's strategic nuclear arsenal after criticizing Mr. Bush's recent pledge to reduce the number of American nuclear warheads.Mr. Bush's campaign aides responded by pointing to the military credentials of his advisers and suggesting that the campaign of Vice President Al Gore was playing politics with the Joint Chiefs of Staff.Mr. Cohen extended the invitation after Mr. Bush proposed last week to consider making unilateral reductions in nuclear weapons, possibly deeper than those now being negotiated between the United States and Russia. Mr. Bush, the presumptive Republican presidential nominee, also pledged to construct a far larger antiballistic missile defense than the one now contemplated by the Clinton administration.Mr. Cohen, appearing today on NBC's ''Meet the Press,'' said Mr. Bush's proposals contained ''internal inconsistencies.'' Building a larger missile defense than the administration's limited one, Mr. Cohen added, would force the Russians and other nations, like China, to increase their own offensive nuclear arsenals, making negotiated reductions far less likely.''Any military commander will tell you, it's far better to have more numbers against a defense than to have a higher defense,'' Mr. Cohen said. ''And so what you do by going up higher on defense, you will force the Russians and others to raise their limits much higher.''Mr. Cohen's objections echoed those Mr. Gore made during his commencement address at the United States Military Academy on Saturday, when he said Mr. Bush's proposals were harmful to arms control and threatening to global stability.Mr. Cohen tried to couch his remarks as a nonpartisan effort to inform the emerging political debate over the nation's nuclear arms and military strategy. Mr. Cohen, a former senator from Maine and the only Republican in Mr. Clinton's cabinet, expressed his ''high regard'' for the governor and his advisers, who include a number of members from past Republican administrations.He said he would invite Mr. Bush to meet with members of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and Adm. Richard W. Mies, commander of the American nuclear arsenal, as a matter of fairness in the presidential campaign.''I think the Joint Chiefs would be willing certainly to do this, and I think it would be important,'' Mr. Cohen said, ''because if this is going to become an area of debate in the fall elections, then I think both candidates ought to have equal opportunity to have access to the information that the vice president does.''''I think that he and then Vice President Gore will be in a better position to debate this in a way that's responsible and, I think, informed,'' he said.Mindy Tucker, the Bush campaign's press secretary, said in response to Mr. Cohen's proposal, referring to two key Bush advisers:''Surely Secretary Cohen is not suggesting that Defense Secretary Dick Cheney and General Colin Powell, who led our defenses, don't understand them. And we are confident that the Joint Chiefs of Staff would welcome Governor Bush's proposal because it allows military planners to determine the appropriate levels of security based on new guidance and a new security era.''''We would hope that Al Gore would call on his administration not to play politics with these briefings or the Joint Chiefs of Staff,'' Ms. Tucker said.Pentagon officials said the invitation to Mr. Bush was Mr. Cohen's idea. While it is common for a president-elect to receive high-level national security briefings as part of the transition to the White House, it is unusual to extend such an early invitation to a presidential candidate from the party out of power, especially one who has not yet received his party's formal nomination.For his part, Mr. Cohen said he ''was appointed in this position to take the politics out of national security debates.'' The invitation, nonetheless, offered tantalizing political implications.In light of Mr. Cohen's criticism, the invitation could be seen as a suggestion that Mr. Bush's ideas are ill-formed. At the same time, having Mr. Bush discuss nuclear strategy with senior commanders could lend weight to the governor's handling of military issues in the campaign.Pentagon officials said they had not yet made arrangements for a briefing. One potentially knotty problem could be the degree of secrecy concerning nuclear weapons. Since Mr. Bush does not have a security clearance, his briefing might be limited to unclassified information.In his proposal last week, Mr. Bush did not say he would reduce the number of nuclear weapons automatically. Instead, he said he would consider reductions based on recommendations by the Pentagon's military commanders. Last Tuesday, even as Mr. Bush made his proposals, those commanders appeared on Capitol Hill and said they would oppose reducing the number of warheads below the 2,000 to 2,500 being negotiated under the third strategic arms reduction treaty, or Start 3.Under Start 2, which Russia's Parliament recently ratified, the American and Russian arsenals are supposed to come down to 3,000 to 3,500, from roughly 6,000 today.In his remarks today, Mr. Cohen defended the administration's efforts to negotiate the Start 3 reductions with the Russians, as well as changes to the Antiballistic Missile Treaty of 1972 that would allow for a limited missile defense against emerging threats from countries like North Korea.''I think we have to do it in the context of how we balance the defense and the offense,'' Mr. Cohen said. ''And we should do so in a very methodical, thoughtful, and intellectually sound way.''
What a difference a candidate makes.In state budget talks in April, the Legislature was prepared to have New York join a new program to let thousands of disabled people stay on Medicaid, the federal health insurance plan for the poor, even after getting jobs. But Gov. George E. Pataki's office balked at the cost, and the plan was dropped, apparently dead for the year.What a difference a candidate makes.In state budget talks in April, the Legislature was prepared to have New York join a new program to let thousands of disabled people stay on Medicaid, the federal health insurance plan for the poor, even after getting jobs. But Gov. George E. Pataki's office balked at the cost, and the plan was dropped, apparently dead for the year.Suddenly, it is very much alive again, and state officials and lobbyists say it stands a good chance of approval. Why? Because its primary author is Representative Rick A. Lazio, the Republicans' new candidate for the United States Senate against Hillary Rodham Clinton. Mr. Lazio was chief sponsor of the bill that created the program and set aside $250 million to help the states pay for it.Republican legislators confess to daydreaming about a bill-signing at which they would join Mr. Lazio, the Republican governor and a few dozen people in wheelchairs -- a politically valuable photo opportunity for the evening news. That notion, they say, has been enough to sway the governor, a prime sponsor of Mr. Lazio's candidacy, into reconsidering the issue.Officials in the governor's office confirmed that the program was once again under consideration but would not say why.''Besides the merits -- and we supported it all along -- this thing is golden politically,'' a Republican state senator said.Many of the Republicans who hold a majority in the State Senate are seen as vulnerable this year, and they see the United States Senate race as being crucial to their chances in November. George W. Bush, the Republican presidential nominee, is not expected to carry New York, so Republican lawmakers want a strong Senate candidate near the top of the ticket.For more than a year, that candidate was Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani, but he dropped out of the race after learning that he had prostate cancer. Mr. Lazio, who is from Suffolk County, will be formally nominated for the Senate at his party's state convention in Buffalo on Tuesday.While the Republicans in the State Senate assert that Mr. Lazio is just as strong a standard-bearer as Mr. Giuliani, they fear that his low name recognition and late start in the race could harm him -- and them -- and they have been eager to bolster his standing with voters.The Medicaid effort for the disabled is a perfect fit, the kind of social program more commonly identified with Democrats. And it contrasts with the image that Mrs. Clinton is trying to impose on Mr. Lazio -- that of a far-right, ideological conservative.Her campaign has noted that she, too, favored the Medicaid program for the disabled, emphasizing the fact that her husband, the president, signed it into law.Michael Kink, a lobbyist for Housing Works, an advocate for people with AIDS, said, ''It's pretty clear that Lazio's entry into the race reignited interest in this.''In conference committees last month, the Assembly, controlled by Democrats,  and the Senate agreed to have New York join the new Medicaid program. But the governor's budget office said it would cost the state $24 million a year, twice as much as estimated by both houses of the Legislature and by advocates for the disabled.In budget talks, the governor's office insisted that if the program were to be included in the budget, the Legislature would have to give up $24 million worth of its pet projects, to keep within the overall spending caps the lawmakers had agreed to. Faced with that, the Legislature dropped the idea, and the $77.5 billion budget was approved without it in early May.But in the last week, as Mr. Lazio emerged as his party's uncontested Senate candidate, several Republican state senators -- including two influential Long Island representatives, Kemp Hannon, the Health Committee chairman, and Dean G. Skelos, the deputy majority leader -- pushed to resurrect the idea. Officials say both houses of the Legislature are still willing to approve it, though that would break the spending cap. The question remains whether Mr. Pataki will go along.Normally, people lose Medicaid benefits if they get full-time jobs. Advocates for the poor have urged softening this, so that the poor do not have to choose between employment and health care, which they say impedes efforts to move people off welfare.The new program allows people with disabilities to keep Medicaid coverage after finding work, if they do not earn more than $45,000 a year. But each state must decide whether to opt into the program and share in its cost. A disabled person earning more than about $17,000 a year would have to pay a monthly premium to stay in Medicaid. The premium would vary depending on the income, ranging from $25 to $333.
This is the first Memorial Day of the new millennium, and thus an appropriate moment to examine the meaning of past Memorial Daysand to speculate on what Memorial Day, besides its role as summer's tribune, may mean to us in the future. It is, first and foremost, a day of remembrance and commemoration, when we honor those who have fallen in war. It is also a day of reconciliation, and whether we give credit for inventingthe holiday in 1866 to the men of Waterloo, N.Y., or the women of Columbus, Miss., the original idea in both places was to honor the war dead from North and South, and thus heal the wounds of a bitter civil war.These two ideas, remembrance and reconciliation, will surely survive in the century ahead. But there may be subtle changes in the spirit if not the essential purposes of the holiday, just as there have been changes in the demography of the marchers. It has been many years since old men in threadbare gray and blue uniforms paraded down the nation's main streets. It has been 20 years at least since we saw more than a few veterans of World War I. Now the cohort that fought World War II is diminishing. George Bush, senior, is almost certainly that celebrated generation's last president.This is the first Memorial Day of the new millennium, and thus an appropriate moment to examine the meaning of past Memorial Daysand to speculate on what Memorial Day, besides its role as summer's tribune, may mean to us in the future. It is, first and foremost, a day of remembrance and commemoration, when we honor those who have fallen in war. It is also a day of reconciliation, and whether we give credit for inventingthe holiday in 1866 to the men of Waterloo, N.Y., or the women of Columbus, Miss., the original idea in both places was to honor the war dead from North and South, and thus heal the wounds of a bitter civil war.These two ideas, remembrance and reconciliation, will surely survive in the century ahead. But there may be subtle changes in the spirit if not the essential purposes of the holiday, just as there have been changes in the demography of the marchers. It has been many years since old men in threadbare gray and blue uniforms paraded down the nation's main streets. It has been 20 years at least since we saw more than a few veterans of World War I. Now the cohort that fought World War II is diminishing. George Bush, senior, is almost certainly that celebrated generation's last president.Our cultural memory is also receding, especially the recollection of what it was like to have an entire country mobilized, body and soul, to fight an enemy. The First and Second World Wars were, to most Americans, unambiguously noble, and so in its goals of eliminating slavery and saving the union was the Civil War. But since then our conflicts have become less clear-cut -- most famously Vietnam, but also to some extent Korea and even Mr. Bush's Desert Storm.In this new century, wars are likely to become even more ambiguous and even less likely to muster automatic support. Indeed, we already know what it is like to engage in gray wars, rather than those in black and white -- murky, uncertain yet undeniably dangerous involvements like those in Somalia and Kosovo.The question is whether in such circumstances Americans will continue to honor their dead as wholeheartedly as they did in the past. The chances are good that they will. Honor came slowly to the veterans of Vietnam, but eventually it arrived. Five years ago, after many delays, a memorial was finally created for the veterans of Korea.Even if one questions the validity of a war, it is still possible to honor individual sacrifice. Indeed, it is obligatory.
Social Security has emerged as a critical issue in this year's presidential campaign, but neither candidate seems prepared to address the system's long-term financial problems. Instead, Gov. George W. Bush wants to let individuals invest a small part of their Social Security contributions in the stock market, where he thinks they will earn a better return, and Vice President Al Gore proposes to keep the system largely intact with an infusion of general tax revenues. Neither proposal would really stabilize the system in the long run. In truth, though Social Security is projected to become bankrupt in four decades, the system is not all that far out of kilter. It would not be hard for bold politicians to devise a fix.Social Security may well be, as Governor Bush has said, ''the single most successful government program in American history.'' It was created in 1935, during the depths of the depression, to provide a guaranteed income to retired workers for as long as they live. Unlike private pension plans, Social Security benefits keep pace with inflation and, unlike 401(k)'s and other popular private plans, Social Security benefits do not fluctuate with stock and bond markets. Social Security provides the majority of income for most retirees and all the income for about a fifth of the elderly.Social Security has emerged as a critical issue in this year's presidential campaign, but neither candidate seems prepared to address the system's long-term financial problems. Instead, Gov. George W. Bush wants to let individuals invest a small part of their Social Security contributions in the stock market, where he thinks they will earn a better return, and Vice President Al Gore proposes to keep the system largely intact with an infusion of general tax revenues. Neither proposal would really stabilize the system in the long run. In truth, though Social Security is projected to become bankrupt in four decades, the system is not all that far out of kilter. It would not be hard for bold politicians to devise a fix.Social Security may well be, as Governor Bush has said, ''the single most successful government program in American history.'' It was created in 1935, during the depths of the depression, to provide a guaranteed income to retired workers for as long as they live. Unlike private pension plans, Social Security benefits keep pace with inflation and, unlike 401(k)'s and other popular private plans, Social Security benefits do not fluctuate with stock and bond markets. Social Security provides the majority of income for most retirees and all the income for about a fifth of the elderly.From its inception, the system has taken in payroll taxes from the working generation and turned almost all of them over to retirees. At the core of Social Security are the notions of social insurance -- everyone participates in a common plan -- and redistribution -- the program tilts in favor of low-paid workers. The benefits for low-paid workers are about 80 percent of their average lifetime earnings, while benefits for high-paid workers are about 30 percent of average earnings. The progressive formula has cut the poverty rate among the elderly by two-thirds, reducing their poverty to below that of the general population. That is a remarkable triumph.The question before voters is whether a program born out of depression -- when poverty was rampant, few married women worked for pay and no one had 401(k)'s or I.R.A.'s to provide for retirement -- needs to be revamped.One reason for thinking so is the projected bankruptcy -- a sobering but manageable situation. The system will run surpluses for the next 15 years, building a large reserve. But in 2010, the first wave of the baby boomers -- the nearly 80 million people born between 1946 and 1964 -- will begin to retire and collect retirement checks. The number of people in the work force for every retiree will fall from about five today to about three in only 30 years or so.  That, and the fact that people are living longer, will put a strain on workers to support the retirement needs of the elderly. The system will begin to run deficits around 2015. By 2037, the trust fund is expected to be empty.But for all the talk of bankruptcy, the system is not facing irreparable financial crisis. Even after 2037, payroll taxes will cover about 70 percent of promised benefits. Deficits over the next 75 years, the planning horizon for the program, will equal less than 2 percent of total payrolls -- hardly a catastrophic shortfall. If the economy were to grow only slightly faster than the actuaries at the Social Security Administration now project, the deficit would disappear.One proposed remedy for financial imbalance is partial privatization, the approach favored  by Governor Bush. Under current law, workers  and employers pay a 12.4 percent payroll tax that goes into a public trust fund. Under partial privatization, workers could divert, say, two percentage points of that tax to private accounts that the worker could then invest in stocks and bonds. Workers would collect less money from the trust fund when they retired, alleviating financial strain on  the system. But they would expect to more than make up for the loss by drawing from their private accounts.Mr. Bush's sketchy proposal fails to answer where he would find the money to pay retirees as payroll taxes were diverted into private accounts. But there are other fundamental problems with the proposal as well.Proponents of private accounts say that investors, based on data going back to the early 20th century, can expect to earn about 5 percent annually above inflation on a diversified portfolio of stocks and bonds. By contrast, the taxes they ''deposit'' in the trust fund will earn an implicit return -- measured in future retirement benefits -- of only 1 to 2 percent above inflation.But that comparison is highly misleading. Private accounts invested in stocks and bonds may well earn less than 5 percent because the economy is expected to slow over the next several decades as the population ages and because stock prices are now overvalued.More important, the advantage that proponents cite on behalf of private accounts is an optical illusion. The trust fund faces the burden of paying trillions of dollars beyond what payroll taxes raise over the next 75 years to provide the benefits  the system is obligated to pay current and future retirees. The sole reason that private accounts look like a better investment than the trust fund is that proponents assume the private accounts would  be relieved of the burden of helping to pay that obligation. But that just deflects the burden onto someone else, requiring Congress to slash retirement checks or other government spending, or to raise taxes.Mr. Bush cites as an advantage that private accounts can be invested in stocks whereas the trust fund by law cannot. But if the law were changed to let the trust fund itself purchase stocks, as President Clinton has proposed, it could invest in the markets far more cheaply than could private accounts. The cost of administering 150 million individual private accounts would be huge, eating away 20 percent or more of worker deposits. Private accounts could also subject individuals, including the poor, to unacceptable investment risk at the most vulnerable time in their lives. Worse, they undermine the principle of social insurance, setting individuals off to fend for themselves without looking out for the needy.Vice President Al Gore proposes to leave the basic system unchanged and would use general revenues to extend the life of the trust fund to about 2050. He ducks proposing tax hikes or benefit cuts that would be needed to solve the system's problems after that date. Indeed, he does the opposite by proposing new benefits for stay-at-home mothers and for widows and widowers, thereby increasing the financial strain on the system.The wiser solution is for Congress to cut benefits and raise taxes modestly, which is all that would be needed to close the system's financial gap. Congress could require all state and local government workers to join the system, boosting its tax revenues. Congress could also raise the cap on earnings subject to the payroll tax, now set at $76,200, to keep pace with the rising earnings of high-paid workers. It could invest Social Security surpluses in private, high-paying bonds, or allow the trust fund itself to invest in stocks.Raising the payroll tax by, say, a half percentage point in 20 or 30 years or transferring a small fraction of general tax revenues into the trust fund would go a long way toward solving the problem. If these and similar measures do not close the entire gap, Congress could hasten the transition to the higher retirement age, 67, that Congress passed in the 1980's. The Social Security ''crisis'' is less drastic than it seems, and can be fixed with relatively modest changes.
INTERNATIONALA3-8Peruvian President Wins In Protest-Filled Election  President Alberto K. Fujimori of Peru, in a runoff vote long on protest but short on suspense, swept to victory against an opponent who had urged his supporters to abstain because of what he called vote fraud and campaign irregularities.A1Internet Transforms East Asia  From Taiwan to Thailand, the region's most powerful families have started a blizzard of online ventures. Asia's tycoons are seizing on the Internet in hopes of expanding their reach and making even more money. In the process, the Internet is transforming the way business is done throughout the region.A1INTERNATIONALA3-8Peruvian President Wins In Protest-Filled Election  President Alberto K. Fujimori of Peru, in a runoff vote long on protest but short on suspense, swept to victory against an opponent who had urged his supporters to abstain because of what he called vote fraud and campaign irregularities.A1Internet Transforms East Asia  From Taiwan to Thailand, the region's most powerful families have started a blizzard of online ventures. Asia's tycoons are seizing on the Internet in hopes of expanding their reach and making even more money. In the process, the Internet is transforming the way business is done throughout the region.A1President of Israel to Resign  President Ezer Weizman of Israel, denounced for financial misdealings, will resign on July 10, his spokeswoman said, putting a scandal-tainted end to what had been one of the most distinguished careers in Israeli public life.A4Israel-Lebanon Border Violence  Israeli soldiers fired on Lebanese and Palestinian civilians who were throwing stones and trying to push across the border from what was until last week the Israeli-controlled buffer zone between the two countries. Four people were wounded.A4Senior Palestinian officials, speaking outside their weekly cabinet meeting, said they expected that peace talks -- suspended by Israel last week in protest of anti-Israeli violence in the West Bank and Gaza Strip -- would resume in the next few days.(Reuters)Credit for Improving the U.N.  The United States General Accounting Office, an investigative arm of Congress, has said in a surprisingly positive report on the United Nations that the administration of Secretary General Kofi Annan has made considerable strides in improving management of the organization.A6Civil Rights March in Australia  More than 200,000 people, a crowd larger than any expected at the Olympics in Australia in September, marched to support campaigns for social justice for the country's black minority. The largest civil rights gathering in Australian history clogged Sydney and forced the police to close much of the city to traffic for up to eight hours.A7Poland Government Imperiled  The junior party in Poland's center-right governing coalition voted to withdraw its ministers, which will probably cause the collapse of the two-and-a-half-year-old government of Prime Minister Jerzy Buzek. The party, Freedom Union, was unhappy with Mr. Buzek's inability to control maverick lawmakers from his own Solidarity bloc.A7Leone Rebels Free Hostages  Liberian and United Nations officials said they believed that Sierra Leone rebels had released the remaining hostages among some 500 United Nations peacekeepers who were captured earlier this month.A3NATIONALA9-13Blighted Areas Are Revived As Crime Drop Takes Hold  Cities across the country are being transformed as neighborhoods that had become frightening wastelands are showing glimmers of renaissance, with the historic drop in violent crime beginning to take hold in even the most blighted areas.A1Crime in New York City remains at a 30-year low, but officials have been trying to allay fears that the city may be headed back to the days when more than 1,500 homicides a year were not uncommon.A12Texans Fight Over Oil Cleanup  Ranchers and oil producers are fighting over cleaning up a less glamorous legacy of the high-flying days when oil was king. There are 25,000 abandoned oil wells in Texas, an additional 15,000 sitting idle and tens of thousands of others that could be leaking.A1Briefing Bush on Security  Secretary of Defense William S. Cohen, left, invited Gov. George W. Bush and his national security advisers to the Pentagon for a briefing on the nation's strategic nuclear arsenal after criticizing Mr. Bush's recent pledge to reduce the number of American nuclear warheads.A10Step Toward Missile Defense  An Air Force rocket built of scrapped missiles was successfully launched yesterday at Vandenberg Air Force Base, Calif. The rocket, intended to be used in creating a missile defense system, was made of three stages from Minuteman II missiles, including one built in 1966, a base spokesman said. The launching was a test of whether such a rocket could be used as a cheaper target for interceptor missiles. It cost $11 million, compared with $21 million for a regular Minuteman II.(AP)SCIENCE/HEALTHDeficiencies in Care of Dying  Millions of Americans have signed living wills and power-of-attorney documents, thinking the papers would help them avoid unwanted treatment and prolonged deaths, but in many cases those measures turn out to be useless. The failure of these advance directives is just one symptom of a much larger problem in the care of people who are dying.A1NEW YORK/REGIONB1-5Stricter Hand Rules At Greener Central Park  New York City is getting fussy about Central Park after having spent $250 million on it, turning the dust bowls of a few years ago into luxurious carpets. In enforcing long-ignored rules, the city is posting signs about littering and ordering the park's musicians and dancers to lower the volume and perform less often.A1Two Arraigned in Massacre  Two men facing an avalanche of evidence in a case that could lead to the death penalty were arraigned in a Queens court on murder and robbery charges in last week's execution-style massacre at a Wendy's restaurant that left five workers slain and two others shot and left for dead.B1Lazio's Plan Revived  A failed plan to let thousands of disabled New Yorkers stay on Medicaid even after getting jobs, is suddenly very much alive again. Governor Pataki's office had balked at the cost, and the plan was dropped, apparently dead for the year. But it now stands a good chance of approval because its primary author is Representative Rick A. Lazio, the new Senate candidate.B1ARTSE1-12Bibliographies on Reserve  Bibliographies, the traditional structural support system for an author's work, have been severed from books and moved to Web sites, in a growing number of instances involving both trade publishers and prominent academic publishers. The advantage, the publishers say, is a smaller, cheaper, more accessible book.A1Music Label Loses a Champion  Joseph R. Dalton, the 37-year-old executive director of the independent boutique label C.R.I., left his position on Friday, saying that he planned to take a few months off before deciding what to do next.E1SPORTSMONDAYD1-10Rookie Wins at Indy  Juan Montoya, a 24-year-old, led the 84th Indy 500 for 167 of 200 laps, and easily finished 7.184 seconds in front of Buddy Lazier.D1Knicks Hobbled Further  A test revealed that Latrell Sprewell has an incomplete fracture in his left foot.D1BUSINESS DAYC1-8France Telecom Plans Purchase  France Telecom is planning to announce tomorrow that it has agreed to acquire Orange P.L.C., Britain's third-largest wireless phone operator, from Vodafone AirTouch for more than $37 billion, executives close to the negotiations said.C1Middleware as a Challenger  One of the most remarkable byproducts of the government's antitrust suit against Microsoft is that a nerdish bit of computer plumbing called middleware has emerged as the star of the case and a focus of public-policy debate in the Internet age.C1Lucent Looks to Buy Chromatis  Lucent Technologies, North America's No. 1 maker of communications equipment, is in negotiations to acquire Chromatis Networks for as much as $5.5 billion in stock, people close to the companies said.C4Inquiries Into Airline Deal  The attorneys general of New York and Pennsylvania have begun inquiries into the effect that United Airlines' proposed acquisition of US Airways would have on competition.C4Business DigestC1OBITUARIESB6-7Maurice Richard  The charismatic star of the Montreal Canadiens through the 1940's and 1950's was 78.B6EDITORIALA14-15Editorials: The constancy of Memorial Day; campaigning on Social Security.  Columns: William Safire, Bob Herbert.BridgeE11  Public LivesA9  CrosswordE11  WeatherD10  Metro DiaryB2
Social insurance began in Europe, principally in Germany in the Bismarck era. In 1911, Winston Churchill carried unemployment insurance in the House of Commons, representing the Liberal government. The Tories opposite said the workers would spend the money on drink; Churchill said it was their money. Whereupon a first principle was established.The American Association for Labor Legislation, an academic group, was established in 1906. Workers' compensation laws began to appear. Soon, in Albany, Al Smith and Robert F. Wagner brought us ''mothers'  pensions'' and the like.Social insurance began in Europe, principally in Germany in the Bismarck era. In 1911, Winston Churchill carried unemployment insurance in the House of Commons, representing the Liberal government. The Tories opposite said the workers would spend the money on drink; Churchill said it was their money. Whereupon a first principle was established.The American Association for Labor Legislation, an academic group, was established in 1906. Workers' compensation laws began to appear. Soon, in Albany, Al Smith and Robert F. Wagner brought us ''mothers'  pensions'' and the like.In the 1930's, for the first time we enacted national legislation providing unemployment insurance, an old-age pension to be known as Social Security, and a mother's pension, Aid to Families with Dependent Children. The first two programs were presented as contributory insurance. I knew Frances Perkins, who was then the secretary of labor, and have talked with one of the experts involved, Luther H. Gulick of Columbia University. Both would go on about Franklin Roosevelt's insistence that each worker have a separate account, like a bank account. His or hers. As F.D.R. put it to Gulick, so that ''no damn politician can ever scrap my Social Security program.'' (Observe that A.F.D.C. was not contributory. Soon it became known as ''welfare,'' and it was repealed in 1996.)President Eisenhower brought us  disability insurance, expanding workers' compensation. Then came President Johnson with Medicare, a contributory health insurance plan, and Medicaid, a welfare measure. A once-a-generation sequence had evolved.And now we have the opportunity for a grand culmination, starting this century with a system of voluntary, contributory savings plans such that Americans will end their working lives with a measure of wealth. An estate. And for the first time, an American idea!A bit of background. In 1977, Social Security, the retirement program, was changed from a pay-as-you-go system to a partially funded system. The revered Robert J. Meyers, who was present at the creation in 1935 and still analyzes Social Security financing, records, ''The underlying financing mechanism was to build up a reserve.'' No one noticed this. I was a member of the 1977 House-Senate Conference Committee that enacted the law, and I surely didn't notice. Nor was it reported.We added two percentage points to the F.I.C.A. tax -- Federal Insurance Contribution Act -- such that today some 80 percent of American households that pay this tax pay more in Social Security than in income taxes. In time, larger Social Security surpluses appeared, enough to moderate the even larger federal budget deficits of the 1980's, and then to bring us into the overall budget surplus of today.Now here is the point. If we will make a few, admittedly difficult but wholly defensible changes in the existing program, those two extra percentage points won't be needed. Workers could take back their half -- the employer keeps the other half -- or could choose to invest the two percentage points in a personal savings plan modeled on that available to federal employees since 1987. Let the magic of compound interest work its magic.Here are the main changes.Use an accurate cost-of-living adjustment. The consumer price index overstates inflation by about eight-tenths of a percentage point, even after recent improvements made by the Bureau of Labor Statistics.Next, provide normal taxation of benefits, which are now only partially taxed. Then extend coverage to all newly hired state and local workers, a quarter of whom don't pay into Social Security from their primary earnings but get benefits through part-time jobs.Finally, increase the number of years counted in computing benefits from 35 to 38. Of a sudden you are in 75-year actuarial balance and don't need those two percentage points of payroll taxes.On March 18, 1998, Senator J. Robert Kerrey and I introduced the Social Security Solvency Act, with these benefit adjustments and a provision for a  ''voluntary investment of payroll tax cut by employees.'' In 1999 it became the Social Security Solvency Act of 1999, the first Senate bill introduced in the 106th Congress other than those reserved for the two leaders. We also included Senator Kerrey's proposal to provide every child with a nest egg of $3,500: $1,000 at birth and $500 on each of the child's first five birthdays.With respect, this is where the coming presidential debate should begin. The numbers add up; they are from the actuaries at Social Security. There are some tricky details, including a far-off increase in retirement age. (But note that now most folk, 76 percent, retire before reaching 65, the so-called normal retirement age.) And of course the main debate will concern the personal savings accounts.It would be unforgivable to label this ''privatization.'' But it has already begun. These savings accounts are being referred to in New York Times reporting as ''partial privatization.''The term goes back to the presidential campaign of 1964, in which Barry Goldwater made an offhand remark that Social Security should be made voluntary. In the definitive study, ''Policy Making for Social Security'' (Brookings, 1979), Martha Derthick explained that though the remark was ''not the party's position and not even clearly the candidate's position,'' it was ''transformed by media coverage and the ridicule of rival candidates (including other candidates for the Republican nomination) into a symbol of Goldwater's radical conservatism.'' As such, she wrote, ''it figured conspicuously in the campaign.''Doris Kearns Goodwin, a distinguished historian of the period, recently described a Democratic ad of that campaign depicting scissors cutting a Social Security card in half.The charge is hurled at every opportunity. Establishing personal savings accounts is described as turning Social Security over to Wall Street. Dock workers would become day traders. A market downturn could wipe out benefits.The latter charge is obscene. The present progressive retirement benefit is fixed in our bill. There is no occasion to touch it. We add a savings plan modeled on the Thrift Savings Plan for federal employees, including senators. The government matches up to 5 percent of an employee's pay. The money is invested, at the employee's choice, in one of three plans, ranging from government bonds to a stock index fund. The employee can switch around from time to time. If there is an element of risk even in a 40-year stretch, at no time are basic Social Security benefits at risk. Those are funded and solid, just as they are today and have been for 60 years.The Thrift Savings Plan was essentially an adaption for federal workers of various retirement plans, principally the 401(k), as it is known, which were passing the tax committees in the 1970's and 1980's. In the Senate it emerged from the Government Affairs Committee. Al Gore, then a senator and a member of the committee, said on July 30, 1985, ''An employee savings plan with government matching funds will give every worker the opportunity to supplement a defined and predictable pension amount.'' He praised a Congressional Research Service report, ''Civil Service Retirement: Capital Accumulation Plans for Federal Employees.''A parallel arrangement under Social Security would, at a 7 percent non-inflation-adjusted rate of return, provide an average worker (making $30,000 a year), with $350,000 of savings at the end of 45 years. A measure of wealth.In 1944 the British came up with the slogan of ''cradle to grave'' protection. We propose something beyond: an estate! For doormen, as well as those living in the duplexes above.Daniel Patrick Moynihan is a senator from New York.
A court here delayed a decision today on whether to release two abducted Lebanese guerrilla leaders whose freedom has been demanded by Hezbollah as a condition for halting anti-Israeli hostilities.Judge Uri Goren of the Tel Aviv District Court said he would rule on July 12 on the cases of Sheik Abdel Karim Obeid of Hezbollah, or Party of God, and Mustafa Dirani of the Amal movement, who have been held without trial since they were forcibly taken from Lebanon.A court here delayed a decision today on whether to release two abducted Lebanese guerrilla leaders whose freedom has been demanded by Hezbollah as a condition for halting anti-Israeli hostilities.Judge Uri Goren of the Tel Aviv District Court said he would rule on July 12 on the cases of Sheik Abdel Karim Obeid of Hezbollah, or Party of God, and Mustafa Dirani of the Amal movement, who have been held without trial since they were forcibly taken from Lebanon.Sheik Obeid, 43, was seized in 1989, and Mr. Dirani, 49, was taken in 1994 -- both as bargaining chips for the release of Capt. Ron Arad, an Israeli airman whose plane went down over Lebanon in 1986.The court hearing was the first time the men had appeared in public since their abduction. Earlier hearings were behind closed doors.Wearing a full gray beard and a large white skullcap, Sheik Obeid sat  next to the bearded Mr. Dirani as both men followed the proceedings through an interpreter.Hezbollah leaders have asserted that they will continue fighting Israel until it releases the two guerrillas and other Lebanese prisoners.The United Nations special envoy to the Middle East, Terje Roed Larsen, who is verifying the Israeli withdrawal from Lebanon, said on Sunday that Israel's release of the Lebanese prisoners ''would give an additional impetus to the restoration of international peace and security in the area.''Aside from Sheik Obeid and Mr. Dirani, the Israeli authorities say they are holding 15 other Lebanese prisoners, who have been convicted of attacks in the former Israeli-held zone in southern Lebanon.Foreign Minister David Levy said today that none of the prisoners could be released at this time and that everything depended on whether quiet would prevail along the Israeli-Lebanese border.The court hearing centered on the question of whether Sheik Obeid and Mr. Dirani posed a danger to Israeli security.Following a Supreme Court ruling last month that barred holding Lebanese prisoners as bargaining chips, the government has argued that Sheik Obeid and Mr. Dirani should stay in jail because they pose a security risk.''They've become a symbol for the struggle of the terrorist organizations against Israel,'' said Devora Chen, the government attorney. ''If they are released, they will continue to play an active role in the terrorist organizations and go back to very senior positions there.''Zvi Rish, the lawyer for the guerrillas, responded that now that Israel has withdrawn from Lebanon, his clients no longer pose a risk, because they had vowed to fight Israel until it pulled out.''When they leave Lebanon, that's the end,'' he quoted Sheik Obeid as saying.''If we're talking about state security, it could be that the danger lies in the very continuation of their imprisonment,'' Mr. Rish told the judge, alluding to the Hezbollah threats to fight on if the prisoners are not freed.Sheik Obeid and Mr. Dirani, in remarks reported by their lawyer and translator, sounded a similar warning, saying their continued imprisonment could lead to increased tension and anti-Israeli attacks.At the conclusion of the hearing, Mr. Dirani asked to give his version of the disappearance of Captain Arad, whom he held prisoner before the airman vanished.Speaking briefly before he was cut off by the judge, Mr. Dirani said the airman was ''stolen'' by Iranian Revolutionary Guards in the Bekaa region in April 1988 when his captors left him in a rush to identify bodies of guerrillas killed in an Israeli attack on the village of Maidun. Mr. Dirani said he had made a ''great effort'' to recover the airman, but Israel ''complicated the situation'' and assassinated the Hezbollah leader Sheik Abbas Musawi.Judge Goren ruled that given ''the newness of the issue'' and in order to examine further arguments made today, he would decide the case on July 12. Until then, he said, the guerrilla leaders will remain in jail.
Vice President Al Gore commemorated the nation's war dead today by recounting his own military experiences in Vietnam and the complex web of emotions, from patriotism to family devotion to guilt, that caused him to enlist three decades ago.In a speech before several hundred people gathered for a Memorial Day ceremony here, Mr. Gore acknowledged that his five months in Vietnam as an Army reporter had not been the most grueling or dangerous, saying, ''I know that my service doesn't in any way match that of the heroes we honor on this day.''Vice President Al Gore commemorated the nation's war dead today by recounting his own military experiences in Vietnam and the complex web of emotions, from patriotism to family devotion to guilt, that caused him to enlist three decades ago.In a speech before several hundred people gathered for a Memorial Day ceremony here, Mr. Gore acknowledged that his five months in Vietnam as an Army reporter had not been the most grueling or dangerous, saying, ''I know that my service doesn't in any way match that of the heroes we honor on this day.''But his time in a combat zone taught him much about sacrifice, honor and loyalty among soldiers, he said in a speech largely devoid of policy, politics or any mention of his Republican rival, Gov. George W. Bush.''Those veterans who are here, whether you served in Vietnam or Korea, the Persian Gulf or World War II or another conflict, you have that bond with those you served with,'' he told the crowd in this small town along the Monongahela River just south of Pittsburgh. ''You felt the same feelings. You saw the same things. You made the same sacrifices.''Governor Bush, who was a fighter pilot in the Texas Air National Guard during the Vietnam War, attended another Memorial Day event, delivering brief remarks that were less personal than Mr. Gore's but that also steered mostly clear of politics and the presidential campaign.''What do we owe the brave?'' he said to several hundred veterans, local residents and Army men and women outside the Killeen Community Center in Killeen, Tex., home of Fort Hood. ''It is our first duty to honor what they have done, and that should not be hard, because it is one of the greatest stories of human history.''For Mr. Gore, the deeply personal speech today fit into a broader effort by his campaign to reintroduce him to voters through television commercials, speeches and other events that highlight his biography. Later this week he is to promote cancer programs by discussing the death of his sister, Nancy, of lung cancer.Nestled in a valley of rolling hills and shuttered steel mills, Elizabeth provided an ideal locale for today's speech by the vice president. The region has large numbers of not only war veterans but also union members and conservative Democrats whose support is seen as vital to his chances of winning Pennsylvania's 23 electoral votes.Although he opposed the war in Vietnam, Mr. Gore enlisted in the Army just two months after graduating from Harvard in 1969. Friends have said he signed up in part to protect his father, Senator Albert Gore, an antiwar Democrat who was running for re-election, from criticism by Republicans who supported the war effort. That was a factor to which one longtime associate of the vice president referred in the ceremonies today.But in his own talk here, Mr. Gore offered another reason for enlisting, suggesting that he could not have faced the guilt in knowing that some other young man from his Tennessee town had gone in his place, and perhaps been killed.''When I went to Vietnam, I had many misgivings,'' he said. ''But my draft board was in Carthage, Tenn., and that made a big difference because, you know, if you found some way not to go, you would know the person who went in your place. That person would have a place and a name and a family and a face.''Mr. Gore described feeling disillusioned upon returning to a nation that was ambivalent, and sometimes hostile, toward Vietnam veterans. That disillusionment, he said, kept him from running for public office for several years.''Do you remember that parade that was waiting for us?'' he said of his homecoming. ''One of the reasons Vietnam veterans always say welcome home to one another was of course there wasn't a parade.''As for Mr. Bush, who spent much of the last month trying to bolster his foreign-policy credentials with proposals related to national defense and remarks on international affairs, he made only the slightest detour in that direction today, calling anew for the development of a vast national defense against ballistic missiles. Both Mr. Gore and Defense Secretary William S. Cohen have recently questioned the prudence of his call for a system much larger than the limited defense the Clinton administration has proposed.Mr. Bush reiterated his own position in a context of a general plea for strengthening the country's armed forces.''Those who man the lighthouse of freedom ask little of our nation in return,'' he said. ''But what they ask, our nation must provide: a military of high morale, a military that's well paid and well housed, a military well prepared and well equipped, a military respected by those in authority, a military that's got a coherent vision of America's duties -- a clear military mission in a time of crisis -- and a modern defense system aimed to protect our homeland and to protect our allies.''Similarly, Mr. Gore said his time living in a trailer park with his wife, Tipper, while he was in training in Alabama had taught him about the need to improve the pay, benefits and housing of active-duty military personnel. And both men said that while it was important to pay tribute to war service with monuments and medals, it was even more important to share with young Americans the details of sacrifice.''We must pass stories of American courage and character to the next generation, to capture their imaginations, to raise a monument in their hearts,'' Mr. Bush said. ''This is the way our democracy renews its promise: by celebrating American heroes and American values without hesitation and without apology.''And Mr. Gore, quoting President John F. Kennedy, said, ''Democracy is a call to untiring effort, to continual sacrifice and to the willingness if necessary to die in its defense.''
Despite the American labor movement's loss in the bruising battle over the China trade bill, supporters and opponents of the movement say that after years of decline, labor has once again become a powerful political force.Unions provided important political muscle that helped Vice President Al Gore locked up the Democratic presidential nomination, and they are certain to be a major force for the Democratic Party in the fall.Despite the American labor movement's loss in the bruising battle over the China trade bill, supporters and opponents of the movement say that after years of decline, labor has once again become a powerful political force.Unions provided important political muscle that helped Vice President Al Gore locked up the Democratic presidential nomination, and they are certain to be a major force for the Democratic Party in the fall.After many people wrote off labor as an irrelevant, toothless dinosaur, the A.F.L.-C.I.O. has displayed considerable muscle on Capitol Hill. Labor has blocked legislation to grant the president fast-track authority to negotiate trade agreements and has helped push through a higher minimum wage and the Family and Medical Leave Act.In other signs of labor's strength, white-collar workers, including doctors and psychologists, are flocking into unions as never before, and labor registered its biggest organizing victory in 60 years by unionizing 74,000 Los Angeles home-care workers last year.Much of this rebound has been engineered by John J. Sweeney, who was elected president of the A.F.L.-C.I.O. four and a half years ago on a platform of reviving labor after its membership and influence had slipped steadily for two decades. To rebuild labor, Mr. Sweeney has focused on attracting new members; as the best evidence of a turnaround, he points to last year's 265,000 jump in union membership -- by far the largest rise since the 1970's.Thomas J. Donohue, president of the United States Chamber of Commerce, said it would be foolish for anyone to think that labor was weak because the House of Representatives defied it last week and approved permanent normal trade relations with China.''Anybody who stands up and says, 'We won this thing by a couple of votes and therefore labor is weak,' they don't know how to count,'' said Mr. Donohue, who led the corporate fight for the trade bill. ''Labor has a lot of money. Labor has a lot of forces on the ground. Anyone who wants to declare them weak, just look out for the next fight.''This year, the 13-million-member A.F.L.-C.I.O. has pledged to assemble its biggest army of campaign volunteers; tens of thousands will distribute literature at workplaces and make millions of get-out-the-vote telephone calls.The labor federation's endorsement of Vice President Gore gave him much-needed assistance in the Democratic presidential primaries, with union foot soldiers helping him trounce former Senator Bill Bradley in the Iowa caucuses and capture the New Hampshire primary.Political experts also give labor much of the credit for Democratic victories in 1998, from Gray Davis's  election as governor in California, to Charles E. Schumer's triumph over Alfonse M. D'Amato for a New York Senate seat, to the party's surprising success in gaining House seats in the last midterm elections.''It's like night and day comparing the A.F.L.-C.I.O.'s political operations today with those in the 1994 elections,'' said Charles Cook, who publishes a nonpartisan political report. ''It's like comparing a Model T with a Ferrari.''But labor has a long way to go to regain the economic might it had in the 1950's. Back then, 35 percent of the nation's work force belonged to unions compared with 13.9 percent today. The sectors where unions have traditionally been strongest, like steel, automobiles, mining and apparel, have been losing jobs the fastest, while the sectors where unions have the least representation, like technology, finance and fast food, are the fastest-growing fields.Organized labor is losing about half the elections in which workers vote on whether to unionize largely because many corporations mount aggressive and expensive campaigns that urge workers not to join unions. As a result of such corporate tactics, unions now represent fewer than 1 in 10 private-sector workers.''The labor movement has done very well in the public sector, organizing government employees, but in the private sector, it is still very difficult,'' said Richard Hurd, a labor relations professor at Cornell University.Labor also faces other problems: the occasional embarrassing episodes of union corruption, repeated Republican efforts to weaken unions, and internal feuding among union leaders over political strategy and trade issues.Businesses contribute 15 times as much in campaign money as unions do, and many Democrats still keep their distance, fearful of accusations that they are in Big Labor's pocket. And for all their efforts, unions lost the fight they cared about most in the last few years, the China trade bill.To reinvigorate labor, Mr. Sweeney has advocated more militant tactics, like those used by thousands of striking Los Angeles janitors who repeatedly blocked traffic last month to draw attention to their low wages. He has also worked to reduce labor's unwanted reputation as a ''special interest'' by having it focus more on helping low-wage workers and by forming alliances with religious leaders, environmentalists, immigrant groups and college students protesting overseas sweatshops.''John Sweeney has a commitment to reach out to those who have been largely bypassed by the labor movement,'' said the Rev. Howard Hubbard, the Roman Catholic bishop of Albany, who has helped lead efforts to rebuild the clergy's once-strong ties with labor. ''He's reached out to the forgotten workers -- child-care workers, nurses' aides, janitors, people at the low end of the scale. He's made a commitment to show solidarity with the poorest workers.''With union membership falling by nearly a fourth from 1979 to 1995, Mr. Sweeney has made attracting more members his No. 1 priority. He often cites studies showing that labor's declining power is a major reason that after-inflation wages have declined for most workers in the last quarter-century.Mr. Sweeney has used his bully pulpit to urge the A.F.L.-C.I.O.'s 68 member unions to hire more organizers and to spend millions of dollars more each year on recruiting. Still, in his first three years at the federation's helm, union membership slid by 150,000 as many unionized workers retired or companies closed unionized factories and moved operations overseas.But Mr. Sweeney's ambitions seemed to pay off last year when the Bureau of Labor Statistics announced that union membership grew by 265,000.Union leaders say they hope those gains are not a one-time blip, but the start of a long-term upswing, although many labor experts say the jury is still out.''I think we're starting to turn the corner,'' Mr. Sweeney said. ''While we've had significant progress in terms of organizing, we still have to do a lot more. We can't rest on modest growth.'' His ambitious -- some say unrealistic -- goal is for unions to organize one million new members each year, meaning there could be a net gain of 500,000 members after layoffs and retirements.But there is a huge obstacle to reaching this goal. Only a handful of unions, most notably the Service Employees International Union and the Hotel Employees and Restaurant Employees Union, are making an all-out effort to attract more workers. Mr. Sweeney said he wished that more unions copied the union he once headed, the Service Employees, which devotes 45 percent of its budget to organizing -- 10 times the percentage of many unions. That union recruited 155,000 workers last year, many of them janitors and hospital employees, the most any union has organized in one year since 1918.''There is still tremendous inertia among certain unions,'' said Kent Wong, a labor relations professor at the University of California at Los Angeles. ''The level of activism among some unions has changed dramatically, but many unions are having tremendous difficulties changing.''In an effort to expand union membership, Mr. Sweeney has gotten the labor movement to reverse its long-held position and embrace immigrant workers, rather than oppose their taking jobs. In the 1980's unions were convinced that immigrants were driving down wages so labor backed a law that punished employers who hired illegal immigrants.But this year the A.F.L.-C.I.O. has called for ending such employer sanctions and granting amnesty to millions of illegal immigrants. Labor changed direction because it now views immigrants as a natural audience for its message and because it sees many employers taking advantage of illegal immigrants.One welcome development for labor is the surge in interest shown by white-collar workers. With managed care squeezing their incomes and professional freedom, thousands of doctors are joining unions, while in New York State, 3,000 psychologists have unionized. Nationwide, 10,000 podiatrists have joined unions and so have more than 20,000 customer service workers at United Airlines and US Airways.Hundreds of I.B.M. workers showed interest in unionizing last year after their company sought to cut their pensions. And even a few dozen workers at Microsoft called for a union because they were angry about being long-term temporary workers, with few benefits, rather than permanent workers.''In a lot of industries, because of the way things are changing, people realize they need some form of collective voice,'' Mr. Sweeney said. ''People are seeing the problems they're confronted with are too big to resolve by themselves.''In the wake of the China trade battle, one of Mr. Sweeney's biggest problems is that many political and business leaders have pegged him as protectionist and anti-trade. These critics misunderstand his position, he insists.Convinced that past trade accords have helped business but not labor, Mr. Sweeney said he told the Clinton administration that the A.F.L.-C.I.O.  would oppose any trade agreements that did not protect workers rights. So when he learned that the administration's trade deal with China contained no worker protections, he saw no choice but to oppose it.''I think trade is good for our country,'' Mr. Sweeney said. ''It's important to our successful economy. We recognize that globalization is here to stay, so the question is how do workers around the world share in the fruits of globalization?''
INTERNATIONALA3-12Indonesia Places Suharto Under House Arrest  The Indonesian government, under intense public pressure to get tough, placed former President Suharto under house arrest as it sought to try him on charges of corruption and abuse of power. The house arrest does not materially change Mr. Suharto's living conditions.A3INTERNATIONALA3-12Indonesia Places Suharto Under House Arrest  The Indonesian government, under intense public pressure to get tough, placed former President Suharto under house arrest as it sought to try him on charges of corruption and abuse of power. The house arrest does not materially change Mr. Suharto's living conditions.A3U.S. Rejects Peru Vote  The State Department rejected the re-election of President Alberto K. Fujimori as invalid, saying it had resulted from a ''flawed process.''A10Decision on Lebanese Delayed  An Israeli court delayed a decision on whether to release two abducted Lebanese guerrilla leaders whose freedom was demanded by Hezbollah as a condition for halting anti-Israeli hostilities. The judge said he would issue a ruling on July 12.A12The leader of the Hezbollah group said its guerrilla fighters would not disarm despite the Israeli Army's withdrawal from southern Lebanon. The Lebanese Army reinstated measures requiring travel permits to try to control the movement of people to the border area and the flow of weapons seized by guerrillas from Israel's allied militia.A12Kosovo Town Remains Torn  Foreigners working in the volatile town of Mitrovica complain that the international security force there still does not control the Albanian-dominated southern part or the northern Serbian enclave.A4Clinton Begins Europe Tour  President Clinton began a weeklong trip expected to be dominated by a stalemate with Russia over an American missile defense system and trade disputes with Europe.A12Military Takes Over Fiji  Commodore Frank Bainimarama, head of the armed forces, declared martial law, stepping into a crisis in which the prime minister has been held hostage by gunmen since May 19.A8Ethiopia Bombs Eritrea  Ethiopian warplanes bombed the airport outside Asmara, Eritrea, in the first air raid on the capital since the war's opening blows in 1998. The raid occurred as the nations prepared for peace talks in Algeria.A10World BriefingA6NATIONALA14-20U.S. Working on Plan To Lessen Wildfire Risks  Congress and the Clinton administration are developing an emergency plan to try to ease the risk from wildfires faced by ever growing numbers of Americans with homes in wooded areas, especially in the mountain West. The emergency plan would nearly double, to $115 million, the amount of money available to the government this year for efforts intended to prevent wildfires from starting. Already this year, more than 40,000 wildfires have consumed more than a million acres, including the land scorched by the blaze in Los Alamos, N.M., which was a case of a pre-emptive fire gone awry.A1Labor's Resurgence  Union supporters and opponents say that despite the American labor movement's loss in the battle over the China trade bill, labor has once again become a powerful political player and will probably be a major force for the Democrats this fall. Much of the rebound has been engineered by John J. Sweeney, who was elected president of the A.F.L.-C.I.O. in 1995 on a platform of reviving labor.A1Remembering Normandy  Part of the National D-Day Memorial was unveiled in Bedford, Va., a community of 3,200 people in 1944 that lost more men per capita -- 19 in the first 15 minutes of the invasion and 4 more within days -- than any other place in the United States.A20Paying Tribute to War Dead  Vice President Al Gore and Gov. George W. Bush commemorated the nation's war dead in speeches that mostly avoided politics. Mr. Gore recounted some of his own military experiences in Vietnam and discussed reasons behind his enlistment.A20Cleaning Up After Derailment  Hazardous-chemical specialists plan to put out fires still burning in two tank cars in Eunice, La., today and begin moving the 30 freight cars that derailed on Saturday, forcing 2,500 people from their homes.A20Vigil for Slain Teacher  More than a thousand people gathered in Lake Worth, Fla., for a Memorial Day ceremony in honor of Barry Grunow, 35, a teacher killed by a student on Friday.A14NEW YORK/REGIONB1-72 Candidates Join Parades, And One Takes a Tumble  Representative Rick A. Lazio received eight stitches to close a split lip he sustained when he fell on his face during a Memorial Day parade in Babylon, in his home district on Long Island. After treatment, he marched in a parade with Mayor Giuliani, in Queens.B1Hillary Rodham Clinton joined a parade in Chappaqua, her adopted hometown, and indirectly criticized Mr. Lazio's opposition to handgun registration by emphasizing her support of it.B5SCIENCE TIMESF1-12Breaking Speed Limit of Light  Researchers have produced light beams in the laboratory that appear to travel much faster than the normal speed of light. As such, the main part of the light pulse exits the chamber even before it enters it.F1Night Landing for Shuttle  Atlantis and its seven-member crew landed at 2:20 a.m. at Cape Canaveral, Fla., after a 10-day mission to the International Space Station.F10Health & FitnessF7FASHIONB9OBITUARIESB8Samuel Taylor  The playwright who wrote Broadway confections like ''Sabrina Fair'' and ''The Pleasure of His Company'' and who also worked on the script for Hitchcock's ''Vertigo'' was 87.B8ARTSE1-8SPORTSD1-8Knicks Even Series, 2-2  The Knicks beat the Pacers, 91-89, to pull even with Indiana in the Eastern Conference finals.D1Early Exit in Paris for Sampras  Pete Sampras, the No. 2 seed in the French Open, lost in the first round to Mark Philippoussis, 4-6, 7-5, 7-6 (4), 4-6, 8-6.D1BUSINESS DAYC1-15Bypassing Windows and Intel  Gateway and America Online are expected to announce today that they will use a processor from an upstart Silicon Valley chip maker, Transmeta, and a version of the Linux operating system in a new Internet device for home use scheduled to go on sale later this year.C1$5 Billion China Stock Offering  China's second-largest telecommunications company, China Unicom, said it would seek to raise as much as $5.26 billion in an initial public offering in Hong Kong and New York.C1S.U.V. Makers Hold Advantage  Law professors and plaintiff lawyers say it remains difficult to win lawsuits based on the damage that sport utility vehicles inflict in crashes, despite Ford's recent acknowledgment that the vehicles can be hazardous to other motorists. The legal issue is not whether the vehicles are particularly deadly to other motorists, but whether that deadliness results in legal liability for automakers.C1In Pursuit of a Wireless System  People close to the talks between Worldcom and the Justice Department on Worldcom's pending $115 billion acquisition of Sprint said the discussions could lead to the sale of the Sprint brand and its long-distance service. That is because Worldcom's primary focus is on Sprint's nationwide wireless operation.C6Business DigestC1EDITORIALA22-23Editorials: The Senate primary in New Jersey; another gain for Irish peace; a gift for the credit card industry.Columns: Thomas L. Friedman.CrosswordE7TV ListingsE8Public LivesB2WeatherD8
'Millionaire' Vs. 'Survivor'ABC is making one thing clear tonight: It may be in the business of making millionaires, but not at CBS.As CBS kicks off its island survival test, ''Survivor,'' at 8 tonight -- a show that CBS clearly hopes will become this summer's phenomenon, as ''Who Wants To Be a Millionaire'' was for ABC last summer -- ABC has decided to make that goal as elusive as possible.'Millionaire' Vs. 'Survivor'ABC is making one thing clear tonight: It may be in the business of making millionaires, but not at CBS.As CBS kicks off its island survival test, ''Survivor,'' at 8 tonight -- a show that CBS clearly hopes will become this summer's phenomenon, as ''Who Wants To Be a Millionaire'' was for ABC last summer -- ABC has decided to make that goal as elusive as possible.At the last minute, past the date by which it could even be included in program listings, ABC threw in yet another edition of ''Millionaire'' tonight to go head to head with the opening night of ''Survivor's'' 13-week run.The news got out last week, about the time TV Guide was arriving with ''Survivor'' on its cover.The next sound heard was a howl of anger at CBS headquarters. Several executives there who did not want their remarks attributed accused their ABC counterparts of playing dirty pool scheduling-wise to undercut CBS's hopes without having anything to gain for themselves.One CBS executive who did speak for attribution was Leslie Moonves, the president of CBS Television, who acknowledged that he was far from happy with the decision.''I think it's bad for the network television business,'' Mr. Moonves said. ''You would think that ABC could accept their victories and not have to go out and try to stop someone else from having a victory.''This position left Stu Bloomberg and Lloyd Braun, the twin chairmen of ABC Entertainment, a but nonplussed.''Why not do it?'' Mr. Bloomberg asked. ''It's a competition. We obviously don't want them to get on the air and get traction with their show. I have absolutely no regrets about doing it.''This is ABC's position, even though putting another edition of ''Millionaire'' on this week, after the official television season has ended, does not provide any ratings benefits for ABC.And the decision does fly a bit in the face of the sentiment expressed by some ABC executives that ''Millionaire'' is a precious program resource that should not be overused. Even Mr. Bloomberg conceded, ''I'd like to rest the show a bit if I can.''But the chance to stop ''Survivor'' before it can get going apparently was too strong a lure to be passed up.Mr. Moonves noted that the decision seemed last-minute, as if ABC suddenly got worried about the attention ''Survivor'' was receiving. ''It clearly came after the TV Guide cover and all the other press we've been getting,'' Mr. Moonves said.But Mr. Braun said, ''This is not something we thought about yesterday.''A member of the ''Millionaire'' production staff said that the extra, anti-''Survivor'' edition of ''Millionaire'' had been in the works for weeks. Which led to the speculation that ABC fully intended a kind of stealth effort against ''Survivor'' at a time when CBS could not alter its starting date.Mr. Braun said, ''We're totally trying to be smart in how we use 'Millionaire.' I don't believe by scheduling our programs against theirs we're in any way compromising the television business. Our job is to get people to watch our network, not the other networks.''The test of interest in ''Survivor'' may be skewed tonight, but CBS executives said they always felt its real test would unfold over the full length of its run, measured by how much word of mouth the series can build up.Each week one of the contestants gets voted off the island by the others, in a game of attrition leading to a climax in which the last survivor takes home $1 million.CBS's hopes for a similar series, ''Big Brother,'' which will play out over 90 straight nights later this summer, may hinge on how well ''Survivor'' builds that audience.But ABC may try to play a hand there as well. ''We've haven't decided yet what we'll be doing with 'Millionaire' the following week,'' Mr. Braun said.Richter's Late FarewellWith a week of shows celebrating his status as sidekick, Andy Richter got a great sendoff from ''Late Night With Conan O'Brien'' in every way,  except from the NBC schedulers. Mr. Richter's final night, Friday, coincided with coverage of one of NBC's N.B.A. playoff games.The game ran so late that it delayed the start of ''The Tonight Show'' almost until the usual 12:35 start of Mr O'Brien's show. That meant ''Late Night'' couldn't start until almost 1:30 a.m.So the ratings for Mr. Richter's finale (he quit the show to pursue an acting career) were nothing to post in his book of memories. That show averaged only a 2.7 in the biggest cities, not even as high as the previous Friday when the show scored a 2.8. (Each rating point represents just over a million homes.)Brokaw to Quiz PutinTom Brokaw will interview the new Russian president, Vladimir Putin, on ''The NBC Nightly News'' tomorrow night, the first in-depth interview Mr. Putin has granted to American television since he took office on May 7.Mr. Brokaw said yesterday that he and his staff had been working on securing an interview with Mr. Putin for several months but that the Russian leader had proved elusive. With the summit meeting with President Clinton scheduled this weekend, the timing apparently was right.''I think there are four big areas we'll concentrate on,'' Mr. Brokaw said. ''First, who is this guy? Then of course, the relationship with the United States and the question of the nuclear arsenals, crime and corruption, and how on earth do you revive that economy.''The interview is likely to take place around midday in Moscow, and Mr. Brokaw said he expected to use a sizable portion of it during tomorrow night's broadcast. More of the interview will be seen on the ''Today'' program on Friday morning and on ''Meet The Press'' on Sunday morning.''I'm looking forward to the chance to really sit down with him,'' Mr. Brokaw said, noting that he was the first American television journalist to interview Mikhail S. Gorbachev after he assumed power. ''I think for the most part Putin is still an enigma.''On another NBC outlet, MSNBC, George W. Bush will sit down for an interview with Chris Matthews on his ''Hardball'' program tomorrow night at 7. This interview will be conducted live, from a restaurant named El Pinto in Albuquerque.Mr. Matthews said he planned to emphasize education, Social Security, missile defense, possible running mates and Mr. Bush's campaign strategy against Al Gore.
THE REPUBLICANSGREEN PASTURES  Some are lush and others are arid, but all of the stops on Gov. George W. Bush's four-day trek through the West will prove fertile -- with money. Mr. Bush, the presumptive Republican presidential nominee, reaped an estimated $100,000 for his campaign at a luncheon in Denver on Tuesday and was expected to raise $300,000 for the Republican National Committee and $125,000 for the State Republican Party in New Mexico at a reception in Albuquerque on Tuesday night. By week's end, after visits to Arizona and Nevada as well, Mr. Bush should collect $350,000 for his campaign, $200,000 for state Republican organizations and about $2 million for the national committee, campaign officials said. They said Mr. Bush would raise $1.3 million in regulated ''hard money'' for the committee and at least several hundred thousand dollars in largely unregulated ''soft money.''Frank Bruni (NYT)THE REPUBLICANSGREEN PASTURES  Some are lush and others are arid, but all of the stops on Gov. George W. Bush's four-day trek through the West will prove fertile -- with money. Mr. Bush, the presumptive Republican presidential nominee, reaped an estimated $100,000 for his campaign at a luncheon in Denver on Tuesday and was expected to raise $300,000 for the Republican National Committee and $125,000 for the State Republican Party in New Mexico at a reception in Albuquerque on Tuesday night. By week's end, after visits to Arizona and Nevada as well, Mr. Bush should collect $350,000 for his campaign, $200,000 for state Republican organizations and about $2 million for the national committee, campaign officials said. They said Mr. Bush would raise $1.3 million in regulated ''hard money'' for the committee and at least several hundred thousand dollars in largely unregulated ''soft money.''Frank Bruni (NYT)AD ADVISORY  Gov. George W. Bush is turning to an executive of one of the nation's best-known advertising agency, Young & Rubicam, for creative suggestions on television commercials. Jim Ferguson, the advertising agency's chief creative officer, has accepted an unpaid, advisory role in the campaign, said Stuart Stevens, a Republican consultant and a member of Maverick Media, the advertising arm of the Bush campaign. ''We have tremendous respect for what these guys do, and there are skills they have that are almost uniquely suited to a presidential campaign,'' Mr. Stevens said. Mr. Ferguson will assemble an informal group of people in New York who may be asked to help write Mr. Bush's television commercials, Mr. Stevens said. Mr. Ferguson, through an assistant, declined to comment.Peter Marks (NYT)PRAISE FROM McCAIN  Gov. George W. Bush's recent statements on arms-control policy, missile defense and trade with China have drawn hearty praise from Senator John McCain, Republican of Arizona. In an op-ed article in Tuesday's Wall Street Journal, Mr. McCain applauded Mr. Bush for embracing internationalist positions that benefit America's interests. Now if only more Republicans in Congress would follow Mr. Bush's lead, Mr. McCain lamented, citing the Senate's vote to reject setting a deadline to withdraw  ground troops from Kosovo. Only 15 Senate Republicans, including Mr. McCain, backed the measure.Eric Schmitt (NYT)THE SENATEGORTON TAKES TO THE ROAD  Senator Slade Gorton of Washington formally began his re-election campaign with a five-day bus tour of the state. Mr. Gorton, 72, a Republican, vowed to make the rising cost of prescription drugs a centerpiece of his campaign. He has introduced a bill that would bar drug manufacturers from charging Americans more for prescriptions than they charge patients in other countries. Democrats say the issue is a smoke screen for Mr. Gorton's failure to take on corporate interests. A September primary will determine Mr. Gorton's Democratic opponent. That race pits the state insurance commissioner, Deborah Senn, against former Representative Maria Cantwell, an Internet executive.Sam Howe Verhovek (NYT)
Gov. George W. Bush challenged Vice President Al Gore's fitness to serve as commander in chief of the armed forces today, saying an erosion of the military's might and morale during the Clinton-Gore administration was the reason ''for a new sign on the Pentagon that says 'Under New Management.' ''Mr. Bush used an appearance here at the Veterans of Foreign Wars Post No. 1, the organization's oldest, to recite a laundry list of current problems with the military, restate his commitment to making necessary improvements and question whether voters should have much confidence in Mr. Gore's capacity for leadership on the issue.Gov. George W. Bush challenged Vice President Al Gore's fitness to serve as commander in chief of the armed forces today, saying an erosion of the military's might and morale during the Clinton-Gore administration was the reason ''for a new sign on the Pentagon that says 'Under New Management.' ''Mr. Bush used an appearance here at the Veterans of Foreign Wars Post No. 1, the organization's oldest, to recite a laundry list of current problems with the military, restate his commitment to making necessary improvements and question whether voters should have much confidence in Mr. Gore's capacity for leadership on the issue.''My opponent -- who's no stranger to exaggeration, I might add --  boasts on his Web site that he has been intimately involved in the best-managed build-down in American military history,'' Mr. Bush said, an unmistakable sprinkling of sarcasm in his voice.''But I want the people of Colorado and America to consider the results of seven years of the vice president's management involvement,'' he said. ''Entire Army divisions are not prepared for war. Military recruiting fell thousands short of its goal. And 6,000 United States soldiers are on food stamps.''''Al Gore claims that qualifies him for a promotion,'' Mr. Bush continued. But, he said, ''the Clinton-Gore record cries out for a new sign on the Pentagon that says 'Under New Management.' ''Mr. Bush's pointed remarks represented an effort by the Texas governor to turn the tables on Mr. Gore and blunt the questions that Mr. Gore and other administration officials have raised about how well Mr. Bush is prepared to manage the country's military and foreign affairs.Political analysts have long considered Mr. Bush's inexperience on the global stage, along with several gaffes that underscored it, to be a significant potential weak spot in his candidacy. Over the last week, both Mr. Gore and Defense Secretary William S. Cohen have expressed particular concern over Mr. Bush's proposal for the research and development of a missile defense system vaster than the one being considered by the Clinton administration.Mr. Cohen, a Republican, warned that it could lead to an arms buildup by other countries, and, in an appearance on a Sunday television news program, he even invited Mr. Bush in for a briefing by Defense Department officials. Mr. Bush, making his first public comments on the matter today, implied that he would not be R.S.V.P.-ing anytime soon.''I found the comments to be political in nature,'' Mr. Bush said at a news conference here after his speech at the veterans' post. He said  he had been amply informed and advised by his own team of foreign policy and defense experts.''I think the briefing I got from Colin Powell and Dick Cheney and Henry Kissinger was substantial,'' Mr. Bush said. ''I've got one of the finest foreign policy teams ever assembled, and I call upon my opponent not to allow members of the administration to politicize matters of defense.''Mr. Bush made no acknowledgment today that some military cutbacks began before the Clinton administration, when Mr. Bush's father was president. Douglas Hattaway, a spokesman for Mr. Gore, said that low military pay was a problem then, too and that there were about 19,400 service people on food stamps in 1991, in President George Bush's administration.Mr. Hattaway noted that the vice president had made his own set of proposals for strengthening the military and increasing spending on defense, particularly for higher pay for enlisted men and women. And Mr. Hattaway questioned whether Mr. Bush was the right person to be raising concerns about military preparedness.''Experts say his irresponsible position on missile defense could lead to a new arms race,'' he said. ''With all the complex national defense issues we face, the next commander in chief should not be going through on-the-job training.''During a telephone conference call with reporters that was arranged by the Democratic National Committee, former Secretary of Veterans Affairs Jesse Brown made those criticisms even more personal, questioning the nature of Mr. Bush's military service in the Vietnam War.Mr. Bush did not serve overseas but instead served in Houston in the Texas Air National Guard. Mr. Gore went to Vietnam as an Army journalist.Mr. Bush's complaint with the health of the country's armed forces was not new, but he rendered it in especially strong terms today. Mr. Bush has said he would call for an extra $1 billion a year over what Congress had already agreed to pay in salary increases for men and women serving in the military. That is one of several ways in which he would spend more on national defense, which he says is currently being shortchanged.''Defense spending as a percentage of the gross national product is the lowest it has been since prior to Pearl Harbor,'' Mr. Bush said today as he presented a litany of facts and figures to portray a military in alarming decline. ''United States Air Force readiness for combat has fallen to its lowest level in 15 years.''''At the same time, we've asked our service men and women to do too much with too little,'' he said, adding that their morale had suffered sharply as a result.He said the blame rested with the Clinton administration, which had overextended troops and deployed them in a sometimes haphazard, poorly planned and unnecessarily prolonged fashion.''Before we commit troops, there has to be a clear strategy,'' Mr. Bush said, citing Bosnia and Haiti as two examples of places where that was arguably not the case.
Poor Little Ricky.He thought he could scamper away from the Clinton curse.But there was the curse, slouching towards Babylon. The day before the biggest day of Rick Lazio's life -- his speech in Buffalo accepting the Republican nomination for the Senate, with all the cameras zooming in for a close-up of that boyish grin -- Bam! Splat! Thwack!Poor Little Ricky.He thought he could scamper away from the Clinton curse.But there was the curse, slouching towards Babylon. The day before the biggest day of Rick Lazio's life -- his speech in Buffalo accepting the Republican nomination for the Senate, with all the cameras zooming in for a close-up of that boyish grin -- Bam! Splat! Thwack!The guy falls flat on his face at the  Babylon Memorial Day parade and cuts his lip so badly he has to get eight stitches, and the lip gets so swollen it's hard to talk and smile, and fuhgeddabout kissing babies with that scary kisser.David Letterman was already having a ball: ''Rick Lazio. One day you're a busboy at the Olive Garden, the next day you're running for Senate against Hillary Clinton. . . . Rick Lazio. Isn't he that Cuban kid's uncle?''Mr. Lazio is so obscure that his own campaign staff is unsure whether his first name is Enrico, as The Associated Press says, or Ricardo, as The Washington Post says.So then Ricky has to take his big bow to the theme from ''Rocky.''Somebody should just come out and ask Hillary if she's got one of those tannis-root charms, the kind Ralph Bellamy and Ruth Gordon made Mia Farrow wear in ''Rosemary's Baby.'' That gal has left way too many spooky casualties in her wake.In politics, you never want a misstep to be upgraded to metaphor.Gerald Ford was a college athlete. But when his stumbles were lampooned by Chevy Chase, the humor resonated because Americans deemed Mr. Ford politically clumsy. His first act as president had been a pratfall -- pardoning Richard Nixon.When Jimmy Carter collapsed while jogging in black socks, it crystallized the sense that he was a wimp. We were fine; he had malaise.When a railing gave way and Bob Dole tumbled off a stage in Chico, Calif., in '96, it reinforced the idea that his campaign was in free fall and his time had passed.By contrast, when Bill Clinton tore a tendon in the wee hours while visiting the golfer Greg Norman in Florida in 1997, it had no figurative echo. Everybody simply reckoned that the president had been cavorting a bit.But when Little Ricky went tumbling down, the stature issue came bubbling up.He looked like an eager puppy springing out of the gate and going all splay-legged. Republicans fretted again: Is he ready for the big show?It was the most overcaffeinated entry into a race since George Bush announced Dan Quayle as his running mate in New Orleans. Little Danny, another Congressional pup itching for the sun, raced up and hugged the startled Mr. Bush, looking, for one terrifying moment, as if he were going to lick the older man's cheek.Republicans had been leery of Little Ricky's gratingly unsubtle ambition. Couldn't he at least thinly veil it? The New York G.O.P. had had to yank at the 42-year-old's leash after he noisily gnawed Rudy Giuliani's leg before the mayor learned he was sick and dropped out.When the nomination suddenly fell into the Long Island Congressman's lap, he was off and running, fairly panting with charm, as Dorothy Parker might put it. At the parade on Monday he was doing so much dashing and bounding and nuzzling and zigzagging, you just wanted to call out, Down, boy, down.You'd think a face gushing blood would be a great excuse to get out of a parade. But the dazed Lazio tried to keep going as though nothing had happened until his wife, a nurse, made him go to the hospital. When he rushed back, stitched and swollen, for a second parade, sprinting and air-kissing, Mayor Giuliani patted him on the back. Down, boy, down.Mr. Lazio has the self-promoting energy of Chuck Schumer and Bob Torricelli without the craftiness. He came out swinging in Buffalo, joking about getting a rematch with the pavement, pillorying Hillary as the candidate of Hollywood and left-wing special interests.He has already accomplished the impossible: He has made the first lady, relentlessly ridiculed by conservatives as a panting-for-power yuppie, look laid back.''I am the underdog in this race,'' Ricky barked in Buffalo.Down, boy, down.
Oh no, not another column on Social Security! But the mailbag suggests that the issue needs one more go-round, because some readers still think Social Security is just a pension fund -- one that compares unfavorably with private retirement plans. And it's true that lately it is being run more like such a fund than before. But the many decades in which it was run on a pay-as-you-go basis hang heavily over the system's prospects, and any honest plan for reform must come to grips with that legacy.For most of its existence, Social Security was basically ''unfunded'': it didn't invest the contributions workers paid in, it simply paid them out to retirees. This hand-to-mouth operation worked because the nation's working population was steadily growing; so each generation, when it reached retirement age, could count on being supported by a much larger generation of workers. For those who worked in the system's early years it was a terrific deal.Oh no, not another column on Social Security! But the mailbag suggests that the issue needs one more go-round, because some readers still think Social Security is just a pension fund -- one that compares unfavorably with private retirement plans. And it's true that lately it is being run more like such a fund than before. But the many decades in which it was run on a pay-as-you-go basis hang heavily over the system's prospects, and any honest plan for reform must come to grips with that legacy.For most of its existence, Social Security was basically ''unfunded'': it didn't invest the contributions workers paid in, it simply paid them out to retirees. This hand-to-mouth operation worked because the nation's working population was steadily growing; so each generation, when it reached retirement age, could count on being supported by a much larger generation of workers. For those who worked in the system's early years it was a terrific deal.But baby boom was followed by baby bust. In the decades ahead, a huge number of retirees will need to be supported by a rather small number of workers. Pay-as-you-go would require either slashing benefits, sharply increasing required contributions, or both.Of course officials have known for a while that this was coming, and they actually -- surprise! -- took some responsible precautions. In 1977 required contributions were increased without a corresponding increase in benefits, and as a result the system has been steadily accumulating a fund that will greatly delay the date at which it runs out of money. But the fund still isn't big enough, and the increased contributions mean that the implied rate of return for today's workers is low compared with what they could get if they were free to invest their money for themselves.The reason for that low return, once again, is not that the Social Security Administration is a lousy investor; it's that today's workers must over-contribute because previous generations of Americans didn't put in enough to finance their own retirement. It's a legacy of the pay-as-you-go past.Now what could a politician who wants to let workers invest their own money honestly propose? He might say: ''I think that workers should be free to invest their own money. Of course, that means that we won't have enough money coming into the Social Security system to pay the benefits currently offered to Americans over 65; so I'm slashing those benefits, starting today. After all, the future belongs to the young!'' Before making that proposal, however, the politician should learn a trade; he's going to be looking for another job very soon.Or he might say: ''I think that workers should be free to invest some of their contributions, say 15 percent, on their own. Of course, we have to maintain the benefits of today's retirees. So in return for giving today's workers the privilege of investing 15 percent of their contributions, I'm going to cut their guaranteed benefits by a lot more than 15 percent -- 30 percent, 40 percent, whatever it takes to keep the system actuarially sound. I believe that today's workers can make enough money in the stock market to compensate. And if you can't, my fellow Americans, that's your problem!''That, as far as I can make out, is what George W. Bush is actually proposing -- though he has been more than vague about the details. He hasn't specified how much guaranteed benefits would be cut, let alone clearly stated that the percentage cut would have to be a lot larger than the share of contributions workers were freed to invest. (The plan described by Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan on this page yesterday would in effect impose cuts on that scale, mainly through reduced cost-of-living adjustments and increased taxes on benefits.)What a politician can't honestly say is something like, ''Even if a worker chose only the safest investment in the world, an inflation-adjusted U.S. government bond, he or she would receive twice the rate of return of Social Security'' -- as if that were a meaningful comparison, as if the obligations to today's older Americans didn't have to be met. But that quote isn't made up -- it's what Mr. Bush actually said.All I can say is that he'd never be able to get away with it if Al Gore were still alive.
In October 1998, Cynthia Marquez was suspected of child abuse after her son Juan, a 10-year-old who takes six pills a day to temper his behavioral problems, pummeled a younger brother, leaving bruises on his arms. School officials called in a complaint to the state hot line, and a city child welfare investigator appeared at her Brooklyn apartment, inspecting her kitchen cupboards and questioning her children.Nine days later, after the charges had been declared unfounded, the case was closed. But the memory lingered.In October 1998, Cynthia Marquez was suspected of child abuse after her son Juan, a 10-year-old who takes six pills a day to temper his behavioral problems, pummeled a younger brother, leaving bruises on his arms. School officials called in a complaint to the state hot line, and a city child welfare investigator appeared at her Brooklyn apartment, inspecting her kitchen cupboards and questioning her children.Nine days later, after the charges had been declared unfounded, the case was closed. But the memory lingered.And so one recent evening, after  Juan started misbehaving again -- screaming, hurling things in the apartment, pushing his younger siblings -- Ms. Marquez, a slight woman weighing barely 100 pounds, considered dialing 911, but stopped short. What if, she wondered, the police call the child welfare agency on her for failing to protect her other children?She called no one. Juan calmed down. But the disquieting choice that Ms. Marquez, 26, faced that evening underscored a larger, complicated fact of family life in Bushwick and other neighborhoods like it across the city. There, where the Administration for Children's Services is regarded as a potent, ubiquitous presence, there is a real everyday fear that a momentary crisis can become something worse. That a parental mistake can lead to an investigation. Or that in the nightmare case, a difficult child can be taken away.Every day, Ms. Marquez says, she worries about the consequences of her troubled boy's temper tantrums and horseplay. ''Problem is, you call 911, and B.C.W. is coming to take your other kids away,'' she said, referring to the child agency, like most other parents here, by its old name, short for the Bureau of Child Welfare. ''Every day, he plays rough. If something happens, B.C.W. is there.''That kind of fear -- whether well founded or excessive -- is the product of a tangled mix of circumstance and public policy. There is, after all, a very real problem of child abuse and neglect in this and other poor neighborhoods, where drug abuse, violence and the everyday stresses of poverty have taken a heavy toll on family life and made frequent visitors of child protective workers.Today, 20 out of every 1,000 children in Bushwick are in the city's protective custody, a rate 10 times as high as it is in the Upper East Side of Manhattan and seven times what it is in solidly middle-class Bayside, Queens, according to city figures. And in Bushwick, there were 1,413 investigations of neglect or abuse complaints in 1998, the most recent year for which statistics are available, while there were only 109 on the Upper East Side.If the stakes are high for Bushwick parents, so, too, are they for the city. The next flawed investigation could be the next high-profile tragedy, and the city, which has stepped up enforcement in recent years, has been alternately criticized for sometimes failing to spot children in grave danger and at other times for removing children far too rashly.That combustible combination of children at risk and an oversight agency under pressure not to slip up can create an atmosphere in which a wide range of parents -- some good, some bad, some in between and stressed out -- alter their conduct, color their conversations and have the frankest of strategic conversations with their children, all because they worry about their first or next encounter with the child protective agency.Parents in Bushwick talk with dread about the possibility that missing eyeglasses or a broken arm could result in accusations of child abuse. Some carry documents clearing them of child abuse charges in case they find themselves being questioned by a caseworker. They tell one another to always have a doctor's note for school absences. They warn their children about what can happen if they tell tall tales at school.Ms. Marquez keeps receipts showing that she has been to the food pantry when her cupboards run bare. ''I have to protect myself,'' she said simply.Historically, anywhere from two-thirds to three-quarters of the tens of thousands of reports of possible neglect or abuse investigated by the city's child welfare agency every year turn out to be unwarranted. And while parents in Bushwick say vigilance in reporting concerns is a good thing, they feel they are living out every parenting move under suspicion.Such suspicions and fear that abound in a neighborhood like Bushwick do not make things easier for the agency's caseworkers.''In poor neighborhoods, people get reported more often,'' said Faye Moore, a former child protective worker in Brooklyn and now a vice president for Local 371, the union that represents the city's caseworkers. ''In neighborhoods where there are more reports, there is mistrust of the agency. We walk in knowing we're not trusted.''Sitting along the Brooklyn-Queens border, Bushwick is among the city's poorest neighborhoods. Nine out of 10 children in the school district here live below the federal poverty line. A majority of residents are blacks and Latinos, and growing numbers among them are newcomers from Mexico and the Dominican Republic, with little or no ability to communicate in English.In the neighborhood's schoolyards and bodegas, on tenement stoops and in community meetings, parents  trade tales about their own encounters with the agency. Some are true; others are bits of scary folklore. All, while hard to definitively confirm, stoke the very real emotional stress of the neighborhood.Ms. Marquez says she has heard of a mother who was reported for neglect because her son's school uniform was not properly pressed.Nieves Padilla, 43, a single mother of four teenagers in the Hope Gardens housing project, had a social worker arrive at her door, she contends, because she refused to sign papers authorizing her daughter to be placed in special education. The charges, brought in 1991, were ultimately dropped, according to papers that Ms. Padilla still takes with her to school meetings.Nery Mejia said her daughter, then 5, suffered a gash below her eye during a squabble over a Barney stuffed toy several years ago. Ms. Mejia wound up with a child abuse case against her after a school official reported it to the state central register.The city cannot confirm or deny either Ms. Mejia's or Ms. Padilla's version of events because they both occurred at a time when charges ultimately deemed to be unwarranted were expunged from the record. Under a new law passed after the 1995 killing of 6-year-old Elisa Izquierdo, case files are now maintained even if charges are dropped. Elisa was beaten to death by her mother, whom the city had long suspected of child abuse and neglect. TBy Ms. Mejia's account, she spent months after the investigation sleeping at her daughter's side, reassuring the child, and apparently herself as well, that nothing would come between them. ''I was scared one day they'd come and take my daughter,'' she recalled.Ms. Padilla wondered aloud whether there was a financial incentive for calling in a complaint to the state child abuse register. ''I don't know if the teacher gets some money!'' she suggested, rolling her eyes to the sky.They do not.State law mandates that school personnel call the state hot line if they suspect abuse or neglect. No proof is required, just reasonable cause for suspicion. Failing to call, if they know a child is being mistreated, is a misdemeanor.The law accords considerable discretion to school officials, said Joshua Marquez, the Board of Education's coordinator for child abuse and neglect prevention. ''The law requires them to file a report whenever they have reasonable cause to suspect, based on their training, based on what they've observed, based on their familiarity with the child,'' he said.In New York City, schools are the largest source of child abuse complaints: a third of all calls to the state central register come from school personnel, according to city officials. And within the city, Mr. Marquez estimated, a higher share come from school officials in poor neighborhoods.That, he said, understandably can create tension between parents and the school system. ''The school is then labeled as a contributor to this whole child protective system,'' he said. But, he added: ''We're not accusing the parent. We are trying to ensure the safety and welfare of the youngster.''That, as Ms. Moore well remembers from her visits throughout Brooklyn, can be a delicate balance. In more affluent communities, school officials and others who spot something suspicious are more likely to discuss it with the family before calling the government. In Bushwick, she says, that may not always happen.For their part, Administration for Children's Services officials point out that their investigations are naturally concentrated in neighborhoods where most of the complaints come from. At the top of the list are Central and East Harlem, a cluster of neighborhoods in the South Bronx, Bedford-Stuyvesant and Brownsville in Brooklyn, followed by neighborhoods like Jamaica, Queens, the Lower East Side of Manhattan and Bushwick.''By law we must investigate all reports made to the state central registry regardless of their neighborhood of origin,'' said an agency spokeswoman, Jennifer Falk.At the same time, acknowledging the longstanding lack of trust in many of those same communities, she said, administration officials are working to ''dispel some of the misconceptions of the agency.'' Foster children, she noted, are now placed in their home neighborhoods, instead of being taken away to a far-flung corner of the city. Caseworkers are now assigned to a particular cluster of neighborhoods, so they do not seem like foreign faces.For now, in Bushwick, fear still runs high. Parents speak of their encounters with the agency as though they were speaking of law enforcement. Classes on how to be a good parent are referred to as probation, while a complaint filed with the child abuse register is likened to having a record that can haunt one later.''It's a record that's going to be there,'' Ms. Padilla said. ''If something happens in the future, it's there forever.''That leeriness carries an additional danger. It can, says Andrew Friedman, a community organizer in Bushwick, keep parents who may be in fact struggling with their children from turning to the very institution designed to help families in trouble -- the child welfare agency.''It ends up being a menacing presence rather than a helpful presence in the rare instances where they're needed,'' said Mr. Friedman, co-director of Make the Road by Walking, a storefront group that advocates on behalf of Bushwick's poor. ''It's a power that's not on their side, that's distrustful of them.''
Wading into one of the nation's most contentious environmental debates, Vice President Al Gore pledged today to prohibit logging and road building on 43 million acres of undeveloped national forests.Mr. Gore's promise goes beyond a proposal the Clinton administration made just three weeks ago that would bar road building across that same broad swath of roadless land in 155 national forests and grasslands. That land accounts for about a quarter of the entire forest system and includes many of its most pristine areas.Wading into one of the nation's most contentious environmental debates, Vice President Al Gore pledged today to prohibit logging and road building on 43 million acres of undeveloped national forests.Mr. Gore's promise goes beyond a proposal the Clinton administration made just three weeks ago that would bar road building across that same broad swath of roadless land in 155 national forests and grasslands. That land accounts for about a quarter of the entire forest system and includes many of its most pristine areas.But even as they praised President  Clinton's proposal, many environmental groups said it did not go far enough because it would not prevent logging in those undeveloped forest lands. Environmentalists also criticized the plan, which is under review, for explicitly exempting the Tongass National Forest in Alaska, the nation's largest.Today, Mr. Gore addressed both complaints, saying he would bar logging as well as road building in the roadless areas. And he strongly suggested that he would extend the same protections to the Tongass, where conservation efforts have been opposed by Alaska's influential Congressional delegation.''If I am entrusted with the presidency, it will be a national priority to preserve these roadless areas as they are, no ifs, ands or buts about it,'' Mr. Gore said. ''No more destructive development and exploitation. And just so I'm crystal clear about it, no new road building and no timber sales in the roadless areas of our national forests. Period.''On the Tongass, Mr. Gore added, ''I will ensure total and permanent protection for the roadless areas in the Tongass, America's great temperate rain forest.''The vice president made his announcement after picking up the endorsement of the League of Conservation Voters, which represents the leadership of more than 40 environmental groups.''His environmental achievements are the most extensive of any public official in high office,'' said Deb Callahan, president of the league. ''Without Al Gore and this administration, we would already be experiencing a dramatic backward slide on the environment.''Beyond its new environmental promises, Mr. Gore's speech was notable for not mentioning Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, his Republican rival. The vice president has been criticized by some fellow Democrats for spending too much time in recent weeks attacking Mr. Bush rather than explaining where he would lead the country.Today's speech, Mr. Gore's aides said, was just the first of several in which he plans to focus on his own proposals and vision, rather than reacting to news that his opponent creates. The vice president has also begun devoting more of his speeches to spotlighting parts of his background, a strategy the Democratic National Committee plans to incorporate into a series of biographical television commercials in the coming weeks.But if Mr. Gore gave his Republican opponent a pass today, Ms. Callahan, who worked on Mr. Gore's 1988 presidential campaign, did not. She asserted that Mr. Bush had done little to reduce air pollution or improve state parks in Texas. And she accused Mr. Bush of pandering to big corporate polluters that have contributed generously to his campaigns.''George W. Bush's appointees to key cabinet and administrative positions predict an administration of, by and for the special interests,'' she said.Dan Bartlett, a spokesman for Mr. Bush, said Mr. Bush's administration had actually added nearly 91,000 acres to the state park system and had significantly reduced the release of toxic pollutants into the air, water and soil.''When Al Gore chooses surrogates to pollute Governor Bush's record, he should choose ones that have their facts straight,'' Mr. Bartlett said. ''The new Al Gore is the same old Al Gore. The negative campaigning will continue.''To counter the league's endorsement, the Republican National Committee circulated today copies of a memorandum written at least six months ago by a board member of the Sierra Club, one of the nation's largest and most influential environmental groups, that sharply criticized Mr. Gore's environmental record.''With this legacy, no real environmentalist could ever endorse Al Gore,'' wrote Michael Dorsey, a doctoral candidate at the University of Michigan school of natural resources and environment.But Daniel J. Weiss, the Sierra Club's political director, described the memorandum as ''one person's opinion,'' adding that it would have ''no impact'' on whether the group endorsed Mr. Gore.Many environmentalists expect the Sierra Club to back Mr. Gore by the fall. Indeed, the group has already spent $250,000 on television commercials attacking Mr. Bush's environmental record. The spots are being broadcast in Michigan, Missouri and Wisconsin and will begin running in Ohio this week.A third, smaller environmental group, Friends of the Earth, which endorsed Bill Bradley in the Democratic primaries and has been sharply critical of Mr. Gore's record on global warming and trade issues, remains undecided in the race. A spokesman, Mark Whiteis-Helm, said the group is considering endorsing Ralph Nader, the Green Party candidate, but has not ruled out backing Mr. Gore.In proposing new protections for the national forests, Mr. Gore stepped into an emerging national debate over development in some of the nation's wildest lands.Advocates of the expanded protections contend that roadless areas encompass some of the cleanest, safest wildlife habitats in the nation. But off-road vehicle enthusiasts and timber industry officials argue that too much public land has already been placed off limits to development. The ban has also been strongly opposed by some powerful Western lawmakers who say it would reduce logging jobs.Forest Service officials have said that simply banning road building would significantly reduce future logging in the roadless areas. But Mr. Gore sided today with environmentalists, who contend that unless logging is specifically prohibited, helicopter logging and other activities could damage the land.Mr. Gore did not consult with Mr. Clinton about today's speech, advisers to the vice president said. But aides to the two men did confer beforehand.In his speech today, Mr. Gore also pledged to prevent oil drilling in the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge in Alaska. And he asserted that passing campaign finance reform legislation would be a form of environmental protection, because it would reduce the influence of big corporate polluters.Mr. Gore also defended his 1992 book on the environment, ''Earth in the Balance,'' which was recently reissued, much to the glee of some Republicans who say it exposed Mr. Gore as an extremist on the issue. But today, Mr. Gore said: ''I am proud I wrote that book. I stand by every word in that book.''He concluded: ''I believe that God created only this one earth and the earth is in the balance. Save it we can, and save it we must.''
INTERNATIONALA3-14Beijing Steps Up Expulsion Of Illegal North Koreans  The Chinese police have sharply increased their efforts to expel North Koreans living under cover in China in recent months, creating fear along the border and fueling a potentially explosive refugee crisis.A1INTERNATIONALA3-14Beijing Steps Up Expulsion Of Illegal North Koreans  The Chinese police have sharply increased their efforts to expel North Koreans living under cover in China in recent months, creating fear along the border and fueling a potentially explosive refugee crisis.A1Prison for Chinese Capitalist  China's most celebrated private entrepreneur, Mou Qizhong, 58, was sentenced to life imprisonment for fraud, ending a remarkable chapter in China's fitful march toward a market economy.A12Hezbollah Gets Busy  Hezbollah has started to operate in southern Lebanon much as it does elsewhere, as a kind of parallel government offering social services, development loans and reconstruction aid, following the Israeli pullout.A3Effort to Restart Peace Talks  Prime Minister Ehud Barak of Israel and the Palestinian Authority leader, Yasir Arafat, are taking steps to revive their stalled peace talks, which were overshadowed for the last week by Israel's abrupt withdrawal from Lebanon. Negotiations are expected to resume this weekend or sooner.A9Clinton Arrives in Portugal  President Clinton became the first president to visit Portugal since Ronald Reagan in 1985, and he will confront the same major issues on this European trip that Mr. Reagan faced -- trade and missile defense.A10French Fraud Inquiry Widens  Fifteen Paris officials, including the mayor's top aide, were put under investigation for election fraud. The news was another blow to the Gaullist party of President Jacques Chirac, which is trying to hold on to the mayor's office, one of the France's most prestigious political posts.A4The French Parliament adopted some of the toughest restrictions on news photography in the West.A4Aristide's Party Gains in Haiti  The party of former President Jean-Bertrand Aristide gained firm control of the Senate in the May 21 election, preliminary results showed.A7U.S. Softens Stand on Peru  The Clinton administration backed away from its own harsh assessment that the presidential runoff election on Sunday was invalid, as American officials privately expressed misgivings over competing United States priorities in Peru.A5An Offer by Ethiopia  Ethiopia took a step toward ending the war with Eritrea by saying it would withdraw troops from territory captured in western Eritrea in the last 18 days. The offer came as peace talks opened in Algeria.A8Fiji's Constitution Revoked  The new military leaders threw out the Constitution and began negotiating with rebels who were holding the prime minister and other hostages in the Parliament complex.(AP)World BriefingA6NATIONALA16-23Gore Expands Clinton Plan For Preserving Forests  Vice President Al Gore pledged to put 43 million acres of undeveloped national forests off limits to logging as well as road-building. And he strongly suggested that he would extend the same protections to the Tongass, where conservation efforts have been opposed by Alaska's influential Congressional delegation.A1Gov. George W. Bush challenged Mr. Gore's fitness to serve as commander in chief, citing what he said was an erosion of might and morale under the Clinton-Gore administration.A20U.S. Official Guilty of Espionage  Mariano Faget, 54, an acting deputy director of the Immigration and Naturalization Service with 34 years of service in Miami, was convicted of disclosing official secrets, making personal use of those secrets and lying to federal investigators about his foreign business ties and meetings with a Cuban diplomat. He faces up to 10 years in prison.A16Boycott of Federal Labs Urged  The Association for Asian American Studies, a group of scholars and educators, urged Asian-Americans not to apply for jobs at federal laboratories. The group cited what it said was racial bias in the treatment of Dr. Wen Ho Lee, charged with mishandling nuclear secrets, and in the application of security rules to Asian-American scientists.A23Opening Oregon Adoption Files  Justice Sandra Day O'Connor rejected an emergency request from birth mothers to delay a state law giving adult adoptees access to their birth records. Officials said application processing would begin today.A16Broader Review of Clean Air Act  The Supreme Court expanded its review of the Clean Air Act by agreeing to decide if the statute requires looking beyond the public health benefits of reducing air pollution to consider the economic costs as well. The appeal was filed by the United States Chamber of Commerce and a group of regulated industries.A19Pie Flung at Cabinet Officer  An advocate of animal rights threw a pie at Agriculture Secretary Dan Glickman at a meeting on nutrition. The pie grazed his coat. Federal officials charged the protester with assault of a cabinet official.A16NEW YORK/REGIONB1-8G.O.P. Nominates Lazio To Oppose Hillary Clinton  The New York Republican Party, meeting in Buffalo, unanimously selected Representative Rick A. Lazio of Long Island to be its candidate for the Senate. Mr. Lazio, who portrayed himself as a moderate, promised a hard-hitting campaign and accused Hillary Rodham Clinton of practicing ''the politics of division.''B1Corzine Paid for Inquiry  Jon S. Corzine acknowledged that he had paid at least $200,000 for a lawyer who had private investigators conduct an inquiry into Jim Florio, his opponent in the Democratic primary for Senate, and members of Mr. Florio's campaign staff.B5SCIENCE/HEALTHEffort on Hospital Safety  The nation's 172 veterans hospitals hired NASA to do for medical safety what it does for aviation: set up a system in which errors can be reported without fear of penalty and use the data to improve safety.A21OBITUARIESA25Robert P. Casey  The governor of Pennsylvania from 1987 to 1994, whose strong opposition to abortion put him at odds with the Democratic Party, was 68.A25EDUCATIONB8Boys, Girls and Geography  A gender gap in the study of geography is now so wide that boys are 45 times more likely to be finalists in the National Geography Bee.A1ARTSE1-10SPORTSD1-8Blazers Upset Los Angeles  The Portland Trail Blazers stunned the Los Angeles Lakers, 96-88, at the Staples Center and forced the Western Conference finals to a Game 6.D3Devils Lead Stanley Cup Finals  The Devils stunned the defending champions, the Dallas Stars, 7-3, in Game 1 of the N.H.L. finals.D1BUSINESS DAYC1-24Broadcast Limits Reconsidered  The F.C.C. proposed easing several decades-old regulations on broadcasters, including one that prevents companies from owning a broadcast station and newspaper in the same city and another prohibiting a company from owning more than one national television network.A1Technology Stocks Ignite  The Nasdaq surged to its biggest percentage gain (7.9 percent) and the second-largest point gain (254.37) in its 29-year history, to close at 3,459.48. But even with the gains, the Nasdaq is still down nearly 15 percent so far this year. The Dow gained 227.89 points, or 2.2 percent, to 10,527.13, and the S.& P. 500 rose 44.43 points, or 3.2 percent, to 1,422.45.C1Overhaul at Sara Lee  The giant consumer goods company, whose products range well beyond cheesecake to include underwear, leather goods and sporting apparel, said it would reorganize its operations and divest itself of four divisions in an effort to re-energize the company and improve earnings and stock growth. For more than two decades, the company has acquired major brands, and annual revenue is now about $20 billion.C1Business DigestC1DININGF1-12EDITORIALA26-27Editorials: Demanding new elections in Peru; the latest gun killings; bipartisan Medicare approaches; work-release for battered women.  Columns: Paul Krugman, Maureen Dowd.CrosswordE9  TV ListingsE10  Public LivesB2  WeatherD8
In the 10 weeks since Boomer Esiason was fired from ''Monday Night Football,'' ABC has offered no information about replacement(s).Don Ohlmeyer, the producer, has cheerfully refused to stoke speculation. When last seen, Howard Katz, the president of ABC Sports, was waving the starter's flag at the Indianapolis 500 on Sunday, leading to speculation that he was interviewing Bobby Knight for Esiason's job.In the 10 weeks since Boomer Esiason was fired from ''Monday Night Football,'' ABC has offered no information about replacement(s).Don Ohlmeyer, the producer, has cheerfully refused to stoke speculation. When last seen, Howard Katz, the president of ABC Sports, was waving the starter's flag at the Indianapolis 500 on Sunday, leading to speculation that he was interviewing Bobby Knight for Esiason's job.Current rumors have Rush Limbaugh out, Sterling Sharpe of ESPN in and Dan Fouts, an ABC college football analyst, being considered. Ohlmeyer said: ''We've talked to a lot of people and auditioned a good number of people.'' Is the Star Search over? ''Maybe not,'' he said.Who besides the play-by-play announcer Al Michaels is in? Well, Hank Williams Jr., who sings ''Monday Night's'' theme song.''Probably,'' Ohlmeyer said.ABC's post-Esiason search has been vexed by the absence of available superstar analysts, and the inability to find escape clauses in the contracts of big names like Fox's Terry Bradshaw, Howie Long and Cris Collinsworth, whom Fox made action figures of last year.''They contacted my representatives, but I'm under contract,'' Long said. He said he would have difficulty leaving Fox ''even if there were an out in my contract'' because of loyalty to the sports division's top executives, David Hill and Ed Goren. ''I know where the rudder is in my shop,'' he said. '' 'Monday Night' is a tremendous stage, but I don't know where it's going.''Ohlmeyer is on target for a mid-June announcement of his analyst(s). ''I'm doing hard-core planning,'' he said.''There's a ton of different pieces to pull together.''He added: ''We're focused on details like the logo, where to shoot our openings and the number of cameras.''Lord Stanley's Finals on ABCIn Year 1 of its National Hockey League contract, ABC has a chance to carry up to five games in prime time, starting with Game 3 Saturday. During its five-year tenure with the N.H.L., Fox reached its maximum of three once, last year.But the Devils-Dallas series offers a problem for ABC: a possible fifth game on June 8, a Thursday, would pre-empt ''Who Wants to Be a Millionaire.''On Thursdays during the recently concluded prime-time season, ''Millionaire'' averaged a 17.5 Nielsen rating, while the finals never achieved more than a 4.0 rating on Fox. Last season, Fox averaged a 3.4 for the finals.ABC's lowest-rated show this season, ''Wasteland,'' averaged a 3.8.Larry Hyams, ABC's vice president of audience analysis, smoothed over the coming precipitous fall of its June 8 rating.''Even though ABC's prime-time number would be lower with hockey, we are exposing the Stanley Cup finals to a much larger and broad-based audience than those who would watch it on Saturday or Sunday afternoons,'' Hyams said.Still, that benefit accrues more to the ratings-starved N.H.L. than to ABC. ''If hockey does well, it helps ABC,'' Hyams added.ABC's postseason 1.5 rating is the same Fox had through the same stage of the playoffs.Extension Period to ExpireThe exclusive period for NBC and Fox to extend their deals with Major League Baseball expires on June 5. But baseball is unlikely to get the maximum until it opens bidding to all comers when the period ends.Baseball clearly wants a major jump above the combined $950 million Fox and NBC will have paid since 1996 when their contracts expire after the World Series.ESPN's new six-year deal -- three very expensive years added to the last three years of the previous contract -- pays baseball an average of $135.8 million annually, nearly four times more than the 1999 fee.''Show me a negotiation where anybody pays less, and we'll have a headline,'' said Ed Goren, the president of Fox Sports. In his view, ESPN is paying so much because its previous deal was undervalued.''I don't see the NBC and Fox packages as being undervalued,'' he said.Knight Gets Off EasyESPN's hourlong interview with Bob Knight last night was riveting as the embattled Indiana basketball coach challenged nearly every question about his anger put to him by Roy Firestone and Digger Phelps. But by not showing Knight the tape of him choking former player, Neil Reed, during a practice in 1997, ESPN failed viewers.ESPN said it planned to show Knight the tape, but five minutes before air time an Indiana official called to say that the university believed the tape would not be aired. ''That wasn't our understanding,'' said Josh Krulewitz, an ESPN spokesman. Why did ESPN give in? It is reasoned, rather lamely, that it had used the tape to introduce the show. Knight couldn't see it, rendering it useless. What if ESPN had defied Indiana?''He could have walked out,'' Krulewitz said. Not showing the tape lessened the program and Firestone's ability to challenge Knight when he said he hadn't watched the tape ''because I didn't have to look at it to know that I didn't choke anyone.''But Firestone was in a bind. He inexcusably admitted that he hadn't seen the tape -- just freeze frames -- so he couldn't dispute Knight's insistence that Reed's allegation was not fully upheld by the tape.TV SPORTS
